Full text of "Valmiki Ramayan"
See other formats
VALMI Kl 


RAMAYAN 

Condensed 



SRIKRISHNA PRAPNNACHARI 


wfar 




Srimad Valmiki Ramayan 


Baalkaand 


Srimate Ramanujay Namah 

Preface 

The Ramayan hardly needs any introduction. It contains the divine legend of one of the 
most loved incarnations of Narayan. He was born as a son of the king of Ayodhya, 
Dasarath. 

His marriage to Sita (goddess lakshmi divine consort), who was born from the womb of 
earth, daughter of Janak, could only take place when He strung the colossal bow of 
Shiv. The story of His wedding 1 forms one of the corner stones of this scripture. 
Vishwamitr, in the pretext of seeking guard to his sacred rites, ushers Him out from 
Ayodhya and finally reaches Mithila, the ultimate place of the wedding. 

Renouncing the right of crown to honour his father, he spent fourteen years in forest as a 
part of a divine plan to eliminate the demons and free the earth from the devil’s 
menaces. 

There are as many versions of Ramayan as many true devotees. Every true devotee 
portrays the divine pastimes according to his perceptive affection to the almighty lord. 
Valmiki Ramayan in Sanskrit, is one of the most primitives in the hands of the worldly 
folks. This, thus forms the fountain head of all the succeeding Ramayan in multiple of 
languages. 

The number of Sarg and shlok in each kand are as below: 


Balkcmd 

11 

2266 

Ayodhya 

119 

4310 

Aranya 

IS 

2467 

Kishkindha 

61 

2362 

sundar 

68 

2858 

yuddh 

128 

5784 

Uttar 

111 

3722 

Total 

645 

23769 


Sri man n Narayan Charnau Sharnam Prapaddye. TFTT TTT ) 

Submission: 

Srikrishna Prapnnachari 
Deepavali, October 17, 2009 


1 One separate full coverage on the wedding of the lord Is being attempted to be presented soon. 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan 


Baalkaand 


Content page 

1-1 Ramayan in nutshell from Narad (100) 1 

1-2 Versatile Verse (43) 2 

1-3 Ramayan composed (39) 3 

1-4 Kush and Lav sings Ramayan (36) 4 

1-5 Ayodhya - physical (23) 4 

1-6 Ayodhya - physical (23) 5 

1-7 Ayodhya - administration (24) 5 

1-8 Aswamedh ygya (24) 5 

1-9 Invitation to Rishyashring (20) 6 

1-10 Rishyashring (33) 6 

1-11 Rishyashring in Ayodhya (31) 6 

1-12 Rishyshring consented to commence the ygya (22) 7 

1-13 Ygya commenced (41) 7 

1-14 Details of aswamedh Ygya (60) 7 

1-15 Son-seeking sacrifice (putrakameshti ygya) (34) 8 

1-16 Dasarath blessed (32) 8 

1-17 Gods advent as monkeys (37) 9 

1-18 Incarnation of four brothers and arrival of Vishwamitr (59) 9 

1-19 Vishwamitr sought Ram (19) 10 

1-20 Dasarath refused to spare Ram ( 28) 10 

1-21 Dasrath brought around (22) 10 

1-22 Ram, Lakshaman accompanied Vishwamitra (23) 10 

1-23 Further journey with Vishwamitra (22) 11 

1-24 Forest of Tataka (32) 11 

1-25 Misdeeds and curse of Tataka (22) 12 

ii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan 


Baalkaand 


1-26 End of Tataka (36) 12 

1-27 Vishwamitra bestowed divine missiles (28) 12 

1-28 Counter weapon to Ram (22) 13 

1-29 Siddh ashram (32) 13 

1-30 ygya a success (26) 14 

1-31 On way to Mithila : night halt at shon river (24) 14 

1-32 Vishwamitr’s forefather (26) 15 

1-33 Vishwamitr’s forefather continued (26 ) 15 

1-34 Vishwamitr’s forefather continued (23 ) 15 

1-35 Story of the Ganga (24) 16 

1-36 Lima’s curse to gods and earth (27) 16 

1-37 Birth of Kartikeya (32) 16 

1-38 Sons of king Sagar (24) 17 

1-39 Auspicious horse stolen (26) 17 

1-40 Sagar’s sixty thousand sons burnt to ashes (30) 18 

1-41 Anshuman found the horse (26) 19 

1-42 Brahma blessed Bhageerath (25) 19 

1-43 Ganga descended (25) 19 

1-44 Bhageerath ( 'rpflrsj ) offered water oblation (23) 20 

1-45 Ocean churning (samudra manthan) (45) 20 

1-46 Indra tried to destroy Diti’s womb (23) 21 

1-47 More about Vishal city (22) 21 

1-48 Legend of Ahlya (33) 22 

1-49 Ahlaya’s emancipation (22) 22 

1-50 Janak greeted Vishwamitr (25) 22 

1-51 Shatanand elaborated on Vishwamitr ( 28) 23 

1-52 Shatanand continued on Vishwamitr ( 23) 23 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan 


Baalkaand 


1-53 Shatanand continued Seeking of celestial cow (25) 

1-54 Shatanand continued Vishwamitr fought for the cow (23) 

1-55 Shatanand Vishwamitr took to penance (28) 

1-56 Shatanand continued Vishwamitr grounded (24) 

1-57 Shatanand continued Trishanku \met Vashishth (22) 

1-58 Shatanand continued Trishanku to Vishwamtir ( 24) 

1-59 Shatanand continued Vishwamitr organized ygya (22) 

1-60 Shatanand continued Trishanku pushed back from heaven (34) 

1-61 Shatanand continued Ambrish in search of the ritual animal (24) 

1-62 Shatanand continued Ambrish performed ygya (28) 

1-63 Shatanand continued Vishwamitr and Menaka (26) 

1-64 Shatanand continued Rambha cursed (20) 

1-65 Shatanand concludes Vishwamitr became Brahmarishi (40) 

1-66 Shiva’s bow shown to Ram (26) 

1-67 Ram and the Shiva’s bow (27) 

1-68 Dasarath invitated (19) 

1-69 Dasarth arrived in Mithila (19) 

1-70 Pre-wedding preparations, forefathers of Dasarath (45) 

1-71 Janak enumerated his forefathers (24) 

1-72 Vishwamitr proposed the marriage of daughters of Kushadhwaj (25) 
1-73 The Wedding (40) 

1-74 Prashuram (24) 

1-75 Prashuram continued (28) 

1-76 Prashuram continued (24) 

1-77 Arriving back to Ayodhya (29) 


23 

23 
24 

24 

24 

25 
25 
25 

25 

26 
26 

27 
27 

27 

28 

28 
29 

29 

30 
30 

30 

31 

32 

32 

33 


IV 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


Srimate Ramanujaya namah 

Bal kand 
(77 sarg) 

1-1. Narad’s sankshep Ramayan (Ramayan in nutshell from Narad) (100) 1 : 

Valmiki once enquired from Narad, “Who is the best among men who has got all the 
ideal qualities? Tell me about him in detail.” Narad was of the view, “Among human 
beings such personality is hard to find. He will, however, describe about Ram about 
whom he had learnt from Brahma." 

Narad continued, “Advent of Ram is in Ikshavku dynasty. He has got rare divine 
personality of Vishnu (1-1-18) 2 and is possessed with charming divine physique, 
knowledge of all Vedas and scriptures and well versed in archery and war fare skills. 
Looking to his qualities, his father king Dasarath decides to crown him as his 
successor. The claim of two boons by Kakeyi, forces Ram to go to forest, and 
instead crown is sought for Bharat. Ram is joined by Lakshaman, and Sita, and 
riding the chariot leaves for the forest. 

For some distance his father and citizens of Ayodhya follow him on way to 
the forest (1-1-29). Arriving at Sringberpur he sends back the chariot and accepts 
the hospitability of Guha, the tribal chief of the place . After crossing Ganga he 
meets Bhardwaj and on his advice he moves to settle in the forest of Chitrakoot. 
Dasrath dies hearing settling of Ram in Chitrakoot. Vashishtha impresses upon 
Bharat to become the king, but instead he goes to the forest to get back Ram as the 
ruler king. Ram sends back Bharat with his sandals under assurance that he will 
come back after completing the boon of his father. Bharat staying at Nandigram 
remained as the custodian king. 

Expecting regular interference in his forest tenure from Ayodhya, Ram 
moved further deep in the forest in the area of Dandakranya. He killed Viradha, 
gave divine welfare to the sages Sarbhanga, Sutikshna, and met Agastya and his 
brother (1-1-41). Agasty gifts Ram the bow of Indra with everlasting two quivers, 
and a sword. He assures sages to eliminate demons and free them from their 
torture. Surpanakha of Janasthan from Dandkaranya is disfigured. On her initiative 
demons attack on him, and he kills Khar, Trishira, and Dushan along with other 
fourteen thousand strong demons. Ravan when gets the news, under convulsing 
rage, he approaches Mareech and although forewarned by him for not entering into 
rivarlry with Ram, he brings Mareech to the ashram of Ram, and by magical tricks 
when Ram and Lakshman are taken away to a remote place, he succeeds in 
abducting Sita. 

Jatayu suffers severe injury by the sword of Ravan when trying to protect 
Sita. When Ram meets Jatayu he succumbs to the injuries after telling him how 
Ravan had abducted Sita. He cremated Jatayu and wailed for his loss of life. On 
way he kills and cremates the demon Kabandh, who when moving to heaven guides 
him to go to Shabari around there. He goes to Shabri and receives great respect 
from her. He meets Hanuman at Pampa lake and befriends Sugriv sanctified by fire 
after he told all about himself in general and Sita in particular. Sugriv then narrates 
his state of torture by his elder brother Vali. Ram promises to kill Vali but Sugriva 
remains skeptical of his strength and tells the stories about the mighty Vali. When 


Number of shlok in the sarg 


2 


The reference 1 is for Balkand, 1 for sarg one, 18 for serial number of shlok in that sarg 


Page 1 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


he shows Ram the mountainous remains of the demon Dundubhi, Ram throws to 
ten yojan the whole lot in a trice by one of his foot thumbs, but Sugriva still remains 
doubtful. When Ram threads with one arrow seven massive sal trees and the same 
arrow passing through a great mountain damages a portion of the netherworld, 
Sugriva becomes confident and takes him to the cave (1-1-67) like Kishkindha. 
When Vali was coming out hearing Sugriv’s roar, Tara cautioned him about Ram as 
Sugriv’s helper, but he didn’t listen to her. In duel with Sugriv, Ram killed Vali by one 
shaft only and made Sugriv the king. 

Sugriv gathers monkeys to locate Sita. On the advice of Sampathi, the elder 
brother of Jatayu, Hanuman leaps over one hundred yojan wide sea and arrives in 
Lanka where he finds Sita meditating in Ashoka vana. Offering Ram’s souvenir and 
his message to her, he smashes the tree arches of Ashok vana. He kills five army 
commanders, seven sons of ministers, Akshay son of Ravan, and finally get trapped 
in fetters which he was capable of destroying but he didn’t do that with an objective 
of meeting Ravan. He burns Lanka to ashes and reaches Ram with the message of 
Sita’s location. Ram arrives at seashore with monkeys and when sea-god doesn’t 
pay heed to his request, he tortures the sea with his arrow. Sea god appears and 
advises him to build a bridge with the help of Nal, and on completion of the bridge 
he crosses to Lanka and kills Ravan. When Sita is released, he expresses his 
apprehension to her about her chastity and asks her to enter into fire. When she 
enters into fire and fire god gives her back sanctifying her love to Ram, he rejoices 
meeting her. He enthrones Vibhishan and getting respects from gods and from their 
help reviving the dead monkeys to life boarding Pushpak he leaves for Ayodhya. On 
way he stops at Bhardwaj ashram and sends Hanuman to Bharat in advance. He 
leaves for Nandigram and reaching there he discards the hair-locks rejoicing the 
union with his brothers. He assumes the mantle of the king.” 

Concluding thus Narad predicts further to Valmiki, “The earth shall become 
joyful in complete social harmony, and free from all shortcomings, and diseases 
when Ram shall become the ruler. He will perform hundred aswmedha ygya and 
give precious gifts of gold and cows to Brahmins. Ruling for eleven thousand years 
he will depart to the divine abode. This Ramayan full with the glory of Ram, when 
recited shall prove a great redeemer and provider of auspiciousness in return to all 
four categories ( yarn known as Brahmin, kshatriya, vaisya, shudra) of the society 
according to their status.” 

1-2. Versatile Verse (43) : 

On completion of Narad’s narration of the essence of Ramayan, Valmiki offered him 
great reverence with his disciples. Thereafter he left the place for his cosmic 
wandering. Valmiki with his disciple Bhardwaj left for river Tamasaa to take his bath. 
After his bath when he was changing his cloth on the river bank, his attention caught 
a sight of a pair of birds enjoying their conjugal life which didn’t last longer, and the 
male bird dropped dead by the cruel shaft of a hunter. The wailing cry of the female 
bird and beating herself again and again over the dead body of his life partner 
moved Valmiki to his core. On his own, instantly came out from his mouth the 
following verse in Sanskrit which is taken as the primordial composition (1-2-15) for 
all subsequent generation of literature. 

*TT HlnaiTq I ' t 


1*^*1 I <hlH hIIe!<ihJI 


Page 2 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


His disciple Bhardwaj and others picked up the glorious recitation immediately. 
Coming back to the ashram the sage’s mind was engaged in the scene and he 
continued brooding over his composition. In the meanwhile Brahma arrived and 
when his welcome and worshiping were over the sage was noticed engaged 
mentally as well as reciting the verse involuntarily. Brahma revealed to Valmiki that it 
was his divine wish that he composed that verse. He further mentioned, “As learnt 
from Narad you will compose the glorious legend of Ram to be known as Ramayan. 
Your composition will remain eternal so long as earth and the universe exists.” 
Brahma, concluding thus, vanished from there. Valmiki along with his disciples, for 
sometime after that continued reciting the verse, from beginning as well as in reverse 
order from end. He found the verse uniquely expressive and observing a set pattern 
of composition using simple syllable of words spread over four quarters which was 
not known earlier and was devised by Valmiki for the first time. 

1 - 3 . Ramayan composed (39) 

As foretold by Brahma Valmiki commenced composing the Ramayan and all 
episodes and legends continued unfolding to him automatically through his 
meditative reflections. He sat east facing over a grass ( kush ) mat, purifying his hands 
with water, folding the palms together when he entered into reflective meditation all 
scenes of Ram, Lakshaman, Sita, Dasarth accompanied by his wives, flashed before 
him as if witnessing the real scene of exchange of smiles, conversation, and 
performances of Ram. He could see him accompanied by Sita in the forest besides 
the male company of his brother (Lakshaman). He composed as an author 
actualizing the legend of Ram as narrated to him by Narad. 

It begins with the birth and incarnation of Ram and continues further sequentially which 
Valmiki described, “Besides of his several delighting anecdotes, he helped Viswamtira, broke 
the mighty bow and married Sita. Ram Prashuram meet, Dasarath plan to anoint him as king 
disrupted by Kakeyi leading to the death of Dasarath, deserting citizens, meeting Guha, 
returning the charioteer Sumanth, crossing Ganga, honouring Bhardwaj, coming to 
Chitrakoot, coming of Bharat, offering water oblation to father hearing about his death, Ram 
sandals enthroned by Bharat staying at Nandigram, Ram moving to Dandakranya, killing of 
Viradh, meeting sages Sarbhanga, Sutikshna, getting together of Sita and Anusuya, and 
offering of angrag by Anusuya to Sita, honouring Agastay and getting blessed by him with the 
gift of bow, Surpnakha and her defacing, end of Khara, Trishira incited Ravan, killing of 
Marich, abduction of Sita, anguished wailing of Ram, emancipating Jatayu, liberating 
Kavandh, moving to Pampa, getting honour of Shavari and obliging her by accepting her 
fruits, meeting Hanuman at Pampa, together with Sugriv at Rishymuka, end of Vali, grieving 
of Tara, crowning of Sugriv, spending rainy days with him, his anger causing Sugriv to collect 
a host of monkeys sending to all quarters, describing the global situation, sending ring (with 
Hanuman), coming to Rikska cave of monkeys and fast to death, seeing Sampathi, 
Hanu man’s leaping across sea from mountain top, meeting Mainak mountain, encountering 
demoness (Sursa), killing of Sinhika (shadow grabber), coming to mountain (Trikoota) of 
Lanka, entering at Night, visiting Ravan and his Pushpak, Sita’s glimpse in Ashoka vana, 
offering of ring to Sita and talking to her, watching misdeeds of demoness, hearing bad 
dreams of Trijata, accepting Sita ornament (for Ram), damaging garden, killing of guards, 


Page 3 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


noose to Hanuman, burning Lanka, victorious blaring and coming back across sea, enjoying 
honey garden, delivering Sita’s ornament as solace to Ram, meeting Ram with Sea, bridging 
over sea by Nal, Laying siege of Lanka at night, joining of Vlbhlshan (1-3-35 : this sequence 
is not in Narad’s narration of Ramayan in first sarga), planning about end of demons, killing of 
Kumbhakarna, Meghnad, end of Ravan, retrieving Sita, enthroning Vibhishan, observing 
celestial Pushpak viman, honouring Bhardwaj on return journey to Ayodhya, sending 
Hanuman to Bharat, getting enthroned, disbanding monkey army, ruling to please the 
citizens, discarding Sita." Ram’s stay on earth and all his legends are minutely 
described by Valmiki in the epic. 

1 - 4 . Kush and Lav sang Ramayan (36) 

Valmiki composed (1-4-2) twenty four thousand shloka (verse), contained in five 
hundred sarg (chapters) and forming six kand (books). There was a later piece of 
book also called Uttara kand. In fact, on completion, of the Ramayan containing glory 
of Sita establishing the end of Ram, when Valmiki was sitting in contemplative mood 
thinking as to who would sing these beautiful verses into melodious voice, two 
brothers Kusha and Lav came to him and touched his feet. They were handsome 
and like true images of Ram himself. Soon they learnt the entire Ramayan and gave 
a melodious voice in tune with the guitar. 

Once their presentation to the gathering of sages earned them glorious laurels and 
they were passing singing and playing guitar, through the royal thoroughfare, Ram 
spotted them and brought them with honour to the court. Giving them due respectful 
seat, and occupying himself his throne amidst his four brothers and ministers, 
enjoyed their melodious song of Ramayan accompanied by playing the guitar. Ram 
was greatly impressed by the entire set of excellently worded storeys, and showed 
greater interest in the portion of the song which covered the legend about Sita. On 
his request, the two singers, who were well versed in musical and singing art 
presented the song in special style of marga rhythm (1-4-36) as well. 

1 - 5 . Ayodhya - physical (23) 

There was a kingdom called Koshal, which had valorous forefathers like Sagar 
whose sixty thousand sons dug up the ocean, Iksahavaku the gem of the dynasty. 
The capital of Koshal was Ayodhya, established by Manu, the first among human 
beings. The king Dasarath resided as Indra resided in Amravati. The city was 
situated on the bank of river Saryu spread over in the length of 12 yojan, and breadth 
of 3 yojan. The ramparts of the city were high and impregnable surrounded with 
moats. The layout of the city has ashtapadi (1-5-16) (octagonal) pattern, avenues 
swept and moist with water having flowers strewn all over. The houses had large 
setbacks and beautifully decorated and maintained. The cluster of gardens with 
mango groves enhanced the beauty of the city. The city had a host of hundreds of 
charioteers fully versed in the game of hunting the wild animals lions, tigers etc. 
using sonic-archery. Sages and ascetics surrounded the city with their hermitages 
performing ygya and observing the vedic practices. 


Page 4 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


1-6. Ayodhya - social (28) 

The king of the city, Dasartha, was like Indra or Kuber, knower of all the religious and 
spiritual scriptures, veda, performer of all sorts of ygya, and known for eliminating 
enemies. He topped the list of Ikshavaku house of rulers for his several credits, viz., 
the fastest charioteer, the top-seeded archer, etc. The city was occupied by the 
people of riches, religious faith, and austerity. Nobody ws seen without a crown over 
the head. There was no scarcity of food, drink and other necessary daily items. No 
beggar was spotted. All the four classes of people resided in the city with full fervor 
of religion. They worshiped their deities, and sacrificial fire existed in all the houses. 
Kshatriya took care of the Brahmins, Vaishya worked in coordination with Kshatriya, 
and Shudra took care of all the three classes (1-6-19). The city had horses (1-6-22) 
from Kambhoj, Bahlik, Vanayuj and also from the region of river-beds. The elephants 
were from Vindhya, and the Himalayas (1-6-23/24/25), and were of the species of 
Iravata (of Indra), Anjana (of Varun), Vaman (of Yama), and Pundrika having 
connections to celestial lineages of gods. They were of different categories called 
Bhadra (for the use of king), Mandra and Mriga (for the use of other nobility and for 
carriers). Two yojan beyond the city was outer rampart as the strict security zone 
maintained by the king. 

1-7. Ayodhya - administration (24) 

On the physical world affairs, the king was assisted by eight ministers: Dhristi, 
Jayant, Vijay, Surashtra, Rashtravardhan, Akopa, Dharmpal, and Sumantr. They 
were all able austere, moralist, honest, valorous and compassionate. On the 
religious and spiritual front he had Vashisht and Vamdev the accomplished spiritual 
personalities to guide his path. Besides, he had other sages and Brahmins: Suygya, 
Jabali, Kashyap, Gautam, Markandey, Katyayan, Dhirgayu, and other ygya 
performing ritual experts of his ancestral legacy. 

The ministers had a high public moral and personal character. They were never 
overpowered by lust, passion or anger while handling the public issues. 

1-8. Aswamedh ygya {24) 

The king once reflected on having no sons and progeny and to get the son he 
thought of organizing aswamedh ygya. Having discussed with his ministers, the 
ablest one Sumantr was sent to invite his guru and Brahmins. When they arrived the 
king put his proposal which got full support from them. They advised him to 
commence it at once on the northern bank of Saryu and release the sacrificial horse. 
The king reminded the participants that if any fault is committed in the ritual and 
procedure of the ygya the brahm-rakshasha keep on look out of loopholes and would 
get success in disrupting it. Ministers and guru with Brahmins assured the king that 
as in the past this ygya would also be faultless and successful. Brahmans dispersed 
and the king also left the council for his inner palace. Reaching his wives he 
acquainted them with his intention which got a welcome acceptance from them. 


Page 5 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


1 - 9 . Invitation to Rishyashring (20) 

Sumantr revealed to the king, “ This relates to your getting the sons. Once 
Sanakadika had narrated a story to the sages in which they mention about inviting 
Rishyashring by you for getting the sons. The background story is that sage Kashyap 
had a son called Bivandak and his son was Rishyashring. Once in the Ang state of 
king Rompad, there was a severe drought, and on advice of Brahmins the king 
invited Rishyshring which fetched rains and the famine ended. The king offered his 
daughter, Shanta to the sage in gratitude (1-9-19 shlok also refers that Rishyashring is 
son-in-law of Dasrath also. Some story relates Shanta to be Dasarath’s daughter being 
brought up by the king Roampad). Therefore you also have to invite him for sons.” 

1 - 10 . Rishyashring (33) 

Sumantr continues, “The sage Rishyashring had always stayed in the forest with his 
father sage Bivandak, and was totally unaware of the women and other worldly life 
style. On the advice of the Brahmins the king Rompad sent a group of most beautiful 
courtesans to impress the sage and get him in his kingdom. Those courtesans made 
their huts near to the area of the hermitage of Rishyshring. Once the sage saw the 
courtesans and getting impressed by them as some celestial beings invited them to 
his hermitage. He offered them proper respect. The courtesans fearing the arrival of 
Bivandak at the hermitage left the place leaving some tasty sweets as gift to the 
sage Rishyashring. The sage’s mind got engaged over them and next day he went to 
their place. The courtesans thus seduced him away from the forest gradually and 
brought him to the Ang region. As soon as the sage stepped in the Ang region 
heavy rains occurred. The king honoured the sage and offered him his daughter 
Shanta for his service. Thus onward Rishyshring stayed in Ang kingdom with 
Shanta.” 

1 - 11 . Rishyashring in Ayodhya (31) 

Sumantr further related the story of the sages sanakadik what they had told, “In the 
dynasty of Ikshavaku there will a righteous and famous king Dasarath. He will go to 
king of Ang to invite Rishyashring who will grace his ygya causing birth of four 
valorous and mighty sons.” Hearing this Dasarth advised Sumantr to tell the story to 
Vashishth and he himself went inside the palace. 

Consequently, he moved with the ministers to Ang and passing several forests, 
when he reached there, the king Rompad greeted him warmly. After staying there for 
seven-eight days Dasarath requested Rompad, “I intend to perform ygya to be 
blessed with sons, and I invite Rishyshring to Ayodhya to grace the occasion.” 
Rompad readily extended his invitation to Rishyshring. Subsequently, the sage 
Rishyashring with Shanta left for Ayodhya and on arriving there they were extended 
royal warm reception, for which Dasarath had arranged in advance by sending a 
swift footed messenger from Ang when he had departed for Ayodhya with 
Rishyashring. 


Page 6 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


1-12. Rishyshring consented to commence the ygya (22) 

After stay for some time, in the month of spring the King put his proposal to the sage 
Rishyshring to commence the ygya and the sage consented to make all the 
arrangements and set forth a free horse as a precursor to the ygya. The king sent 
Sumantr to invite sages Suygya, Vamdev, Jabali, Kashyap and his family priest 
Vashishtha. On the arrival the sages lauded the king’s proposal and advised to make 
all arrangements on the northern bank of Saryu where ygya would be performed 
lead by the sage Rishyashring. 

1-13. Ygya commenced (41) 

On the commencement of next spring after one year, the king entered the ygya 
venue and the steps required to set forth the free horse were organized. Vashishtha 
addressed the Brahmins and other state workers and advised them to prepare the 
ygya venue with due diligence making all arrangements for stay of the invitee kings, 
sages, and their horses, elephants etc.” He asked Sumantr to invite the kings of the 
globe, all classes of people ( Brahmins , kshatriya, vaishya, and shudra ) with due 
respect to all. He advised him to go personally to invite the king Janak, king of Kashi, 
king of Kakeya who is father-in-law of Dasarth and his son, king of Ang Rompad, 
king of Koshal Bhanumant, king of Magadth Praptigya. He advised further to take 
permission of the king Dasarth to invite kings of Sindhu, Sauvir, Saurashtra, and 
kings of southern zone with kings of the earth. With swift action of Sumantr the kings 
arrived and offered valuable gifts to Dasarath. 

On arrival of the invitee kings, Vashishth invited Dasarth to commence the ygya in an 
auspicious muhurtha. Dasarth worshipped Vashishth, Rishyashringa and other 
sages and resolved to conduct the ygya. 

1-14. Details of aswamedh Ygya (60) 

On completion of one year the horse came back to Dasarath. Ritiwika (priests leading 
the ritual procedures) honouring the assembled gods, performed pravrgya, and 
upsada. Then followed savan in the morning. In the mid day the sap of som creeper 
was used to perform the second savan and the third savan was also completed as 
per scriptural commands. All sages and Rishyashring invoked the presence of Indra 
and other gods. All the Brahmins and invitees were served tasty food and 
refreshment which they relished. The king had continuous inflow of invitees, and 
matching was the reception to them with relished food, and cloths. At the time of 
raising wooden posts, 6 bilb, 6 khadir, 6 parnin, 1 shleshmatak, 2 devdaru: total 21, 
each 21 cubit high were staked draped with shining cloths, gold, and gems. They 
looked like constellation of saptrishi worshipped with flowers and sandals. 

The queen Kaushlya performed the ritual of sacrificing the symbolic horse. The 
priests continued the sacrifice for three days. Selected and purified bricks wet with 
milk were used in preparing the fire quarters where oblations were poured. The 


Page 7 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


shape of the fire quarter was identical to garuda with his extended wings and tails. 
First day sacrifice was called chatushtom, second day was ukthya, third day was 
atiratra. Although ashwamedh was completed in three days oblations but some more 
important ones were further conducted to ensure the blessings of the progeny and 
they were jyotishtom, ayushi, atiratra, abhijit, viswajit, aptoryam. Four groups of 
priests conducting the ygya were donated the kingdom: hota the east, adhvaryu the 
west, brahma the south, udgata the north. The Brahmins returned the kingdom to the 
king as he was capable to rule and Brahmins were engaged in teaching and 
learning. The king in lieu thereof offered them cows, gold, silver, and gems. The 
Brahmins surrendered all the gifts to Vashishth and Rishyshring. What they got back 
from those two chiefs of the ascetics, they distributed among themselves. 

The king prayed Rishyshring for conducting the ygya for his dynasty. When the sage 
mentioned that the king would be blessed with four valorous and righteous sons, the 
king went into ecstasy. 

1-15. Son-seeking sacrifice (putrakameshti ygya) (34) 

Observing the hymns of Atharva veda (1-15-2) Rishyshring began the oblation for 
son-blessing sacrifice. The assembled gods accepted their part of offerings. The 
gods took the advantage of this special occasion and addressed to Brahma, “Due to 
your blessings, Ravan is torturing without fear all of us including the sages on earth. 
So fearsome is he that fire, wind, and ocean desert their natural characteristics when 
they face him. Find some way out for his elimination.” Brahma thinking aloud 
expressed, “I have blessed him immortality against yksha, gods, gandharva etc. but 
not against a human being. Let his eliminator be a human being.” In the meanwhile 
Vishnu mounting Garuda arrived. Gods offered their prayer and requested him to 
incarnate as son of Dasarath to eliminate Ravan. Vishnu consented to their prayer 
and assured them that he would incarnate in the house of Dasarath and after 
eliminating the demons lead by Ravan rule over there for eleven thousand years. 

1-16. Dasarath blessed (32) 

When gods appreciated his assurance, Vishnu asked as to how, using what means 
the demon chief could be eliminated. The gods advised to kill him in war. After 
hearing from them that he was required to take birth in human form, he left the place. 
Soon after that ygya purusha appeared from the fire holding a golden pot with silver 
lid full of payasam. The ygya purusha was draped in red and black dress fully 
bejeweled and his face shining red like fire. Fie addressed Dasarath, “O, King, hold 
this and distribute them to your wives. They will bring forth sons for you.” Dasarath 
respectfully received the pot, and the divine being disappeared. The king came to his 
inner palace and gave half of the paysam to Kaushlya. Flalf of the half he gave to 
Sumirtra. Fie again made two parts of the balance and gave one half to Kaikeyi, and 
the other half again to Sumitra. The queens ate the divine payasam and in course of 
time the signs of pregnancy appeared on their body. The king was fully pleased to 
notice the pregnancy of his wives. 


Page 8 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


1 - 17 . Gods advent as monkeys (37) 

Brahma exhorted gods to help Vishnu in the mission of eliminating demons. He cited 
his own example when he had produced Jambvan, and similar to that the gods 
should also produce monkeys mighty and valorous. Gods following his advice 
produced: Vaali (Indra), Sugriv (Sun), Tara (Brihaspati), Nal (Viswakarma), Neel 
(Fire), Gandhmadan (Kuber), Mayand and Dvid from Aswinikumar, Sushen (Varun), 
Sharav (Thunder god), Hanuman (Vayu). Thousand more were multiplied from them 
and they spread over several forests and mountains. First they occupied mountain 
Rikshavat, and gradually they began spreading all over. They were capable of 
fighting mightiest elephants, lions and tigers. 

1 - 18 . Incarnation of four brothers and arrival of Vishwamitr (59) 

On conclusion of the ygya, the king bade farewell to the sages and invitee kings. 
Rishyashring with his wife Shanta and father-in-law Rompad left for their abode. The 
king with his wives entered the palace. 

On completion of one complete cycle of the six annual seasons, after the conclusion 
of the ygya, in the month of chaitra , on the ninth day of the bright fortnight, Aditi 
being the deity of the day’s ruling star punarvasu (1-18-9/12), when the five planets 
were exalted with Jupiter and Moon in ascendant cancer, Ram incarnated from 
Kaushlya representing half Vishnu. 

Bharat was born from Kaikeyi, in pushya nakshatra, in Pisces ascendant and he 
represented one quarter of Vishnu (1-18-15). Laskshaman and Shatrughan were 
born from Sumitra when the rising sun of the day was in ashresha nakshatra, and 
they complemented the full representation of Vishnu. (The disposition of stars suggests 
that Ram was born in seventh star of the asterism, Bharat was born next day in the morning 
in the eight asterism, and Lakshaman and Shatrughn were bom later in the day after Bharat 
in the ninth nakshatra). 

The streets were strewn with flowers showered from celestial gods, gems stormed 
from royal palaces. The occasion was of great rejoicing and celebration. 

On the eleventh day Vashisth performed their naming ritual: Elder one Ram, next is 
Bharat, and the other two as Lakshman and Shatrughn. 

Hair tonsuring followed by investing with the sacred thread was celebrated on due 
time with offering of valuable gifts and feasts to Brahmins and citizens. 

From the beginning Ram had affinity for Lakshaman, so much so that in his absence he 
won’t accept food. Bharat had similar affection for Shatrughan. The pair thus bonded together 
were seen together everywhere be it horse riding, forest hunting, or dining. In due course 
they learnt veda and scriptures along with mastery in archery. 


Page 9 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


Once when the king was interacting with ministers in royal court about the marriage 
of his sons, the guard informed him of the arrival of Vishwamitr. The king moved 
forward with his priests to welcome the sage Vishwamitr. Offering him arghya 
(welcome water) he was given a high seat. Being greeted by Vashishth and others 
Vishwamitr kept on enquiring the general welfare of the state. The king, then offered 
to serve the sage, if he had arrived with some specific objective. 

1 - 19 . Vishwamitr sought Ram (19) 

The sage revealed, “ He has taken a spiritual vow and to complete that mission I am 
facing hindrance from two demons Mareech and Subahu. It is time bound for ten 
days and during this vow I can’t show anger which would spoil my mission, otherwise 
I would have cursed them. I therefore seek the hands of your eldest son, who alone 
can restrain those two demons and I would be able to complete my mission. You 
discuss with your ministers and priest Vashishth about this and handover to me 
Ram.” 

1 - 20 . Dasarath refused to spare Ram ( 28 ) 

The king replied, “My son is not of sixteen either. I got him after sixty thousand years 
of my issueless life. How can he be able to face those mighty and cruel demons. 
Instead, I would go and fight with my army, but I can’t spare Ram.” When he asked 
the details of the demons, the sage expressed, “In the lineage of Pulstya, the great 
and mighty demon Ravan is the protector of those two demons Mareech and 
Subahu.” Hearing about Ravan the king lost his nerve and spoke, “ O, Sage, when I 
am not able to stand against Ravan, how can my son Ram would do that." Dasarath 
lost his balance imagining the ferocities of the enemies and he became inconsistent 
in his statement finally refusing to spare Ram. 

1 - 21 . Dasrath brought around (22) 

Hearing refusal of Dasarth, the sage Viswamtira lost his cool and burst out, “I am 
going the way I came, but you rejoice in the glory of your dynasty for not keeping the 
words you gave me when I arrived here.” Hearing his wrathful resolve and ready to 
leave, Vashishth interfered and assured the king, “The sage Vishwamitra is in 
possession of potential missiles of prajapati Krisaasva. The daughters of prajapati 
were married to Krishasva, and Jaya and Suprabha beget mighty missiles. The 
missiles were handed over by Shiva himself to the sage Vishwamitr. Besides, his 
potential is infinite and he would enrich Ram with those mighty weaponry. He would 
also see that Ram is totally protected.” Hearing Vashishtha, Dasarth got reasons to 
consent to spare his son with Vishwamitra. 

1 - 22 . Ram, Lakshaman accompanied Vishwamitr (23) 

Dasarath himself brought his sons, Ram and Laskhaman and blessed by the 
mothers, father and guru Vashishth they moved forward following Vishwamitr. Gods 
showered flowers over them, celestial drums blared in their honour followed by the 


Page 10 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


conch blaring in Ayodhya. Each one of the two brothers had two quivers perched 
over their shoulders protruding above the body looking like hoods of snakes. The 
sage looking like Shiva, lead a pair of trine-headed serpents, behind him. Having 
gone one and a half yojan the sage stopped on the southern bank of Saryu and 
addressed them, “Before sunset I must impart two potential mantra, bala and atibala 
to you. Although your divine potential is apparent still these mantra would help you 
against hunger, climatic vagaries, and unforeseen troubles in future.” With taking 
water in hand the sage offered bala and atibala to them and they spent their night on 
the bank of Saryu. 

1-23. Further journey with Vishwamitr ( 22 ) 

Before the day break, the sage woke up the sleeping brothers from their grass bed 
reciting the following shlok (famous in vaishanvite tradition to lead all the morning 
recitations called suprabhatam). 


TKH^T iiy I '-jm RWtT PTcRT I 

Tran 


On completing their daily spiritual offerings they set out further. Going ahead they 
came to a hermitage on the confluence of the Ganga and Saryu, where several 
mendicants were engaged in meditation. Vishwamitr explained to them, “It is a 
sacred place where Shiva used to meditate. When the god of passion, Kam, tried to 
interrupt Shiva’s meditation, the enraged eyes of Shiva burnt Kam to ashes. Later he 
was given back life but without any formal body, and thereafter he is called Anang.” 
They stayed there for night being greeted by the sages of the hermitage. At night 
they entered the hermitage after taking ablution in the Ganga and completing the 
sandhya gayatri. Vishwamitr narrated several delighting stories at night. 

1-24. Forest of Tataka ( 32 ) 

In the morning after performing sandhya gayatri they were escorted by the 
mendicants to a boat to cross the confluence. In the midst of stream they heard a 
tumultuous sound coming out of flowing water. On Ram’s enquiry Vishwamitr related 
thus, “Saryu comes out of a sar (lake), called manas, created by brahma over mount 
Kailas. The sound is from the Saryu when meeting the Ganga here.” 

On getting down on the southern shore of the confluence they moved ahead and 
entered a deep and desolated forest. Vishwamitr revealed, “This forest was earlier 
full of lives and riches. Indra when afflicted by sin of killing Vritra demon who was a 
Brahmin, was freed of his sin here by the efforts of sages and gods who were trying 
to purify him with sacred water. Indra pleased with his liberation from the sin blessed 
this land and called it malada and karush which mean filth and sin of human beings. 
Since he got freedom from the filth and sin he called them thus. The demoness 


Page 11 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


Tataka wife of Sund, and her son Mareech haunt this forest often. Tatak is yakshi 
and is alone as mighty as thousand elephants. Mareech is a fearsome strong 
warrior. You have to be on alert, against them from now onwards.” 

1-25. Misdeeds and curse of Tataka (22) 

Ram queried, “Yaksh are trivial beings, how come she commands such a mighty 
strength of thousand elephants ?” Vishwamitr narrated the strory, “Once yaksh 
Suketu worshipped Brahma to get a progeny. He blessed him with a daughter 
charming and beautiful and she was Tataka. She was married to Sund, and she 
begot a son Mareech, a mighty warrior. They together used to intimidate sages, and 
once Agastya was in their trap. He cursed them to become demon and man eater. 
Tataka lost the grace of a beautiful woman and since then she and Mareecha under 
curse of Agstya have become havoc to mankind. No one except you can face them. 
Don’t hesitate eliminating a woman for she is a sinner. Remember, Indra had to 
eliminate Manthra daughter of Virochana who was went upon destroying the earh. 
Similarly Vishnu eliminated mother of Shukracharya, wife of Bhrigu, who was 
committed to wipe off Indra from his existence. You are the prince, of the territory 
and the welfare of the people is to be ensured by you.” 

1-26. End of Tataka (36) 

Assuring the sage that two brothers were obedient to him, Ram sounded the string of 
his bow. Hearing the frightening sound, Tataka rushed towards him in rage. She 
began showering stones and boulders over them. With the daunting sound of 
Vishwamitr the calamity halted away from them, but he exhorted them to eliminate 
her. Ram shooting his shaft cut off her arms, and Laskhamn mutilated her face by 
cutting her ears and nose, but she using her magical power, kept raining the stones 
and boulders. “It is going to be dusk soon, and afterwards she would be invincible, “ 
Said Vishwamitr. Ram using his sound-tracking shaft hit her in the chest and she 
dropped dead over ground. Gods, Indra and others felicitated Ram over his 
performance. They urged Vishwamitr to handover the missile of Krisaasva to 
empower them further. They spent their night in Tataka forest as the forest had 
regained the erstwhile grandeur and luster after the end of Tataka. 

1-27. Vishwamitr bestowed divine missiles (28) 

When they got up in the morning, in Tataka forest, Vishwamitr invited Ram with 
sweet words, “ I am highly impressed by your performance. I am in command of 
several divine ashtra (missiles) and other weaponry under the control of various 
gods. I want to hand over them to you which will reinforce your potential when you 
need them in future.” The ashtra were as follows: dand chakr, dharm chakr, kal 
chakr, Vishnu chakr, Indra chakr, Shiva’s shul (trident), brahmshir, aishiki (dry blade), 
brahmashtra, two maces : modaki and shikhari, dharmpash, kalpash, varunpash, two 
bolts: shusk (drier), ardra (drencher), pinak (of Shiva), narayan, shikhari and pratham 
of air god, hayashir, kronch , two numbers of shakti. 


Page 12 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


Those used by demons and to counter them: kankal musal (pounder), two numbers 
ghor (rods) \kapal and kinkin. 

Favourties of gandhava: vaidyadhara, mohan (stupifier), prasvapan, prasaman, 
varshan , soshan, santapan , vilapan, manav, 

Applicable against pishach ( like demons): mohan, tamas, sauman, samvart, 
mausal, saty, mayamay, 

Other missiles; solar (sungod): tejprabha\ lunar (moon-god): shishir ; twasta\sudarun\ 
bhag.darun-, manava.shiteshu 

Introducing thus the above said weapons to Ram, the sage Vishwamitr sitting east 
facing offered them to Ram reciting the divine invoking hymns of each of them. The 
controlling respective gods appeared there, and submitted to Ram for acceptance. 
Ram welcoming them gave his full respects to the respective gods of the missiles 
and advised them to leave for now and spoke, “whenever I need you in future you 
should appear and perform. “ 

Thereafter Ram showed his deep reverence to Vishwamitr for offering him divine 
weapons and they left for further journey. 

1-28. Counter weapon to Ram (22) 

Ram further enquired for the counter weapons and Vishwamitr readily offered him a 
host of weapons in command of Krishasva: 

satyvant, stykriti, dhrist, rabhas, pratiharatar, paranmukh, avangmukh, dhridanabh, 
sunabh, dashaksh, shatvaktra, dasashirsha, satudra, padmanabh, mahanabh, 
dundnabh, svanabhjyotish, sakun, nairasya, vimanl, yaugandhar, vinidra, daitya, 
pramadhan, suchibahur, mahabahur, nishakli, viruchar, sarchimali, dhritamali, 
vrittiman, ruchir, pitrya, saumanas, vidhut, maker, pravira, rati, dhan, dhanayau, 
kamrup, kamruchi, moham, avaranam, jimbhrik, sarpnath, panthan, varan. 

The gods of the missiles appeared in different forms as they were capable of 
changing their form during attack time. Some of them were in the form of smoke, 
moonlight, folded palm, etc. Ram thanked them and advised them to go back their 
natural resort and appear when he invoked them. They gave a round to Ram and 
left. 

Moving ahead, Ram noticed a dense forest having flocks of charming birds, and 
varieties of animals, and enquired Vishwamitr about that. 

1-29. Siddh ashram (32) 

The forest is around siddh ashram where Vishnu practiced meditation for hundreds 
of years. Later it was possessed by his Vaman incarnation. Virochan’s son, Bali was 
the demons’ emperor who had vanquished Indra, Vayu and others and had become 


Page 13 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


famous in the three worlds. He commenced a vedic ygya. Gods keeping fire- god as 
their leader approached Vishnu and prayed for early restraining of Bali. In the 
meanwhile Kashyap and Aditi had completed their meditation here in this ashram 
and in their vision got the Narayan enquiring them. They sought him to be born as 
younger brother of Indra and regain the lost glory of gods on the hands of Bali. 
Narayan responded positively and appeared as a radiant dwarf, Vaman. He went to 
Bali and won the three worlds in three steps as a gift from the demon emperor. He 
then gifted the worlds to Indra and gods were restored to their earlier status. 

Vishwamitr said, “This siddh ashram has become the place of accomplishment for 
me also. But here demons create several obstructions in successful completion of 
ygya. You need to safeguard our mission here.” Vishwamitr lead two brothers inside 
the ashram as if moon was accompanied by two favorite asterism of punarvasu and 
pukhya. The resident sages welcome them with due reverencce. Ram assured the 
sage to commence the ygya and maintained vigilance overnight successfully. Next 
morning when Ram and Lakshman were ready from their daily ritual of worship, 
Vishwamitr ignited the ygya fire in the altar. 

1-30. ygya a success ( 26 ) 

When Vishwamitr was engaged in the ygya activities, Ram wanted to know what 
time did demons attack. The sages around him told, “Until completion of ygya 
Vishwamitr maintains silence. This ygya is completed in six days and six nights.” 
Hearing that Ram and Lakshman maintained the vigil and it was last day that they 
heard loud noise in the sky which was coming out of the assemblage of demons over 
the siddh ashram. Ram used the manav arrow and Mareech was thrown hundred 
yojna away in the ocean. Using his second arrow vayu-ashtra he killed and 
eliminated the other demons lead by Subahu. On completion of ygya Vishwamitr 
expressed his obligation to Ram and praised his performance. Thus praising Ram, 
the evening arrived, and they began preparations for attending to sandhya worship. 

1-31. On way to Mithila: Night halt near shon river ( 24 ) 

Next morning after completing the morning worship, Ram with brother Lakshaman 
came to Vishwamitr and enquired whether he has any further command for them. 
The sages assembled there informed Ram, “We have got an invitation to attend a 
ygya being performed by the king, Janak. We would like that you may also come 
with us where you may have an opportunity to see the mighty divine bow in 
possession of the king. His forefather, Devarat had obtained that bow from gods after 

performing a vedic ygya. (The bow belonged originally to Shiva and he gave it to gods, and from them it 
came to the house of Mithila) The bow is worthy of a glimpse as it is tough to string for a 
common human being. On special occasions it is open to public view otherwise it is 
worshipped with due rituals everyday inside the palace.” Vishwamitr set out 
assuming the tacit consent of Ram and Lakshaman to accompany him. His 
accompanying sages came out of the hermitage with hundreds of carts full of their 
belongings. They paid respect to the local forest gods for their cooperation in 


Page 14 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


completing the ygya successfully. The birds and animals of the siddh ashram came 
out to bid farewell to Vishwamitr. The sage returned with due respect to the 
hermitage. On moving ahead when the day came close to end, they camped on the 
bank of the river shon. Ram being impressed by the prosperity of the area enquired 
more details about that. 

1 - 32 . Vishwamitr’s forefather (26) 

There was a saintly king Kush who was married to the princess of Vidarbha and was 
blessed with four sons: Kushamb, Kushanabh, Asurtrajas, and Vasu. On his 
command to be righteous in rule, his four sons established four cities Kaushabmi, 
Mahodaya, Dharmarany, and Girivrajam respectively. 

Vishwamitr continued, “This place where we are now belonged to Vasu, and the river 
is called Maagadhi promoting the agricultural yield of this area and encircles the five 
high rise mountains of this area. Kushanabh was blessed with one hundred 
charming daughters. Once impressed by their beauty air-god sought directly with 
them to marry all of them and bestow divinity upon them. They refused saying that 
they would go by the decision of their father and not on their own. Feeling humiliated 
air-god caused them to lose their graceful physique. When those cursed girls came 
back home, father Kushnabh seeing their ugly form asked as to how all that 
happened.” 

1 - 33 . Vishwamitr’s forefather continued (26 ) 

Vishwamitr further continued, “Those girls narrated what had happened with air-god. 
The king patiently lauded their righteousness and pardoned air-god. Kushnabh 
began looking for a fit groom to marry them. There was a upright celibate sage Chuli 
who impressed by a maiden Somda blessed her with a brilliant son called Brahmdat 
who became also very righteous and famous. Brahmdat established his mighty 
kingdom at Kampilya. Kushnabh approached him to marry his hundred daughters 
and he agreed. When the marriage was being solemnized, by simple touch of hands 
of Brahmdat to those girls their deformities vanished and they got back their initial 
charm. Kushinabh was very happy and accorded them a warm send off with 
Brahmdat. The mother of Brahmdat, Somda was very happy to see one hundred 
daughter-in-laws and also with the power of his son who eliminated air-god’s curse 
from those girls. “ 

1 - 34 . Vishwamitr’s forefather continued (23 ) 

Continuing the narration Vishwamitr said, “Kushinabh performed a son-blessing ygya 
for he had no son. His father Kush who was brain child of Brahma, predicted to him 
that he would be blessed with a righteous son and left for brahmalok. In course of 
time, Kushinabh got blessed with a son called Gaadhi.” 


Page 15 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


Vishwamitr disclosed, “I am the son of Gaadhi. I have one elder sister called 
Styavati, who is married to the sage Richik, and she in her physical form got into 
heaven. However later for the benefits of the worldly people she transformed herself 
into the river called Kaushiki having genesis in the Himalayas. I used to stay in her 
vicinity in the Himalayas. It is for this vow, that for some time, I was away from her 
and got my ygya completed at siddh ashram with your cooperation.” 

Saying thus indicating the lapse of night almost to midnight, Vishwamitr asked Ram 
to take rest. All thereafter slept on the bank of the river Shon. 

1-35. Story of the Ganga (24) 


?|WTrTT R5TT TW TfVTn Muriel I 


3TtTS TT%2 r FRFT 3TTW*TT II 

Before the day break, Vishwamitr waked Ram (1-35-2) and advised to make 
preparations for further journey. After daily ritual they set out and after a half day 
travel they arrived near the river Ganga. After offering the day’s oblations to fire, and 
taking mid day food, Ram requested the sage to narrate the legend about the 
Ganga. Vishwamitr narrated, “Himvan, the mountain chief, had two daughters from 
his wife, Mena, the daughter of Meru. The elder daughter was Ganga and the 
younger was Uma. On gods request Ganga was gifted to them and she was taken to 
heaven. 

1 - 36 . Lima’s curse to gods and earth (27) 

Ram further asked the sage as to how she got name of tripathga. On hearing him, the sage 
began the story first of Uma and Shiva. Shiva and Uma, immediately after their divine 
wedding, were engaged in yogic copulation and in this process over one hundred celestial 
years elapsed. Seeing no offspring coming out of the divine couple even after they 
maintained prolonged copulation, Gods became afraid that who would be able to endure the 
birth of an offspring after such a long period of copulation. Gods anticipating very unusual 
situation of Uma not able to bear the womb, approached Shiva and advised him to restrain 
from further copulation. Shiva responded positively, and he dropped his agitated semen over 
the earth which inundated the forests and mountains. Fire god with the help of wind god was 
able to absorb the flood which had taken a shape of huge white-mountain. This was used 
later for the birth of Kumar. Uma was angry over gods, because it was on gods’ intervention 
that his consort discontinued the copulation. She cursed gods to remain issueless. Because 
the earth bore the semen, Uma cursed her also that she would have several husbands and 
her face would be disfigured by irregularity of mountains, rivers and oceans. 

1-37. Birth of Kartikeya (32) 

Gods lead by Indra prayed Brahma for a commander-in-chief of their army to fight 
out demons. They mentioned about the Uma-Shiva incident and her curse upon 


Page 16 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


them. Brahm justified her action and advised them to go to fire-god to use the 
Shiva’s semen to impregnate Ganga, the elder sister of Uma. Fire-god, hearing the 
Brahma’s command approached Ganga who readily consented to the proposal. She 
became pregnant but was unable to bear the heat of the radiant brilliance of the 
embryo which came originally from Shiva and got enhanced from the association of 
Fire-god. The embryo was then, on the consent of Fire-god, ejected in the forest of 
the Himalaya. Gods advised the star Krittika to feed the newly born baby. She did 
that and the newly born child grew into six heads to suckle milk from all the six 
entities of the Krittika. In one day he blossomed into full youth. All the gods lead by 
Fire-god arrived there and crowned him as the commander-in-chief of the gods’ 
army. He was named variously Kumar, Kartikeya and Skanda. His name Skanda is 
because of “skann” which means “semen skipped", and Kartikeya because he was 
fed by Krittika in his infancy. 

Vishwamitr concluded, “I have described thus to you the story of Ganga who gave 
birth to Kumar ( kumar sambhav, 1-37-31 ) who is variously called Kartikeya and 
Skand. Those who become his devotee shall attain worldly pleasure of being blessed 
with sons, longevity and would reach his celestial abode upon death.” 

1 - 38 . Sons of king Sagar (24) 

Vishwamitr continued narrating, “O Ram, long back, in your dynasty, there was a 
king named Sagar. He had no issue. He had two wives, one named Keshini daughter 
of Vidarbha king, the other Sumati, daughter of Aristhnemi and sister of Garuda. The 
king undertook a great penance on one of the Himalyan mountains called Bhrigu 
Prvarshan. Pleased by his penance, sage Bhrigu blessed him to have one son from 
Keshini who will be the ancestor of the dynasty, and sixty thousand mighty and 
energetic sons from Sumati. 

In course of time Keshini gave birth to a son who was named Asamanj. He picked up 
a peculiar habit of throwing the young children in the water of Saryu and enjoying 
their death by drowning. The king banished him out of his territory for the cruel 
nature of killing children. Later it his son Anshuman who became the glorious king in 
the dynasty. 

Sumati delivered a large egg-shell which burst into sixty thousand tiny eggs and they 
after being quarantined in pitchers of ghee, brought fourth sixty thousand children; 
with the passage of time they all grew into strong and energetic princes. 

After some time the king Sagar resolved to perform ashwamedh ygya and 
accordingly preparations commenced. 

1 - 39 . Auspicious horse stolen (26) 

Ram being engrossed in the story of his forefathers, requested the sage to continue 
the details further. The sage narrated, “There are two large mountain ranges 
Himalaya (father-in-law of Shiva) and Vindhya; both peer each other. The venue of 


Page 17 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


ygya was selected on the ground between them. While Anshuman, the great 
charioteer and archer was guard of the auspicious horse, on the second day of the 
vedic ritual the auspicious horse was stolen by Indra disguised as a demon. The 
priests conducting the ritual exhorted the king to early retrieve the horse failing which 
the occurrence of inauspicious events would haunt all of us. Listening their 
command, the king urged his sixty thousand sons who were mighty ones to scour the 
earth and find out the horse. He also asked to share among them one squre yojan of 
earth to each so that sixty thousand square yojan of landmass was dug up 
simultaneously until the horse was located. The grandson of the king Sagar, 
Anshuman remained with him at the vedic venue. The multitude of princes finding no 
trace of horse over entire Jambu dweep began digging down the earth and 
continued moving to lower levels. This caused harm to several subterranean lives 
and their respective gods gathered around Brahma to relieve them from the action of 
those mighty princes.” 

1 - 40 . Sagar’s sixty thousand sons burnt to ashes (30) 

Brahma consoled them, “The lord and protector of earth is Vasudev and earth is 
divine consort of Madhav. These days he is in the form of Kapila meditating in the 
netherworld and his wrath would burn them to ashes.” On hearing from Brahma 
coming of their end soon all the thirty three gods bowing to Brahma came back fully 
relieved. 

Those princes while digging the earth from all sides reached a common place 
where all gathered together. Since they didn’t find the horse after digging to that 
extent of the earth they went back to the king Sagar and intimated about not locating 
the horse even after digging the earth to its subterranean level. The enraged king 
commanded them to dig further and go to rasatal and locate the horse by hook or by 
crook. As commanded by his father they again resumed their digging further to 
rasatal (rasatal is one of the seven subterranean world in the order of depth from the earth 
surface : atal, vital, sutal, talatal, rasatal, patal). In this process they encountered 
Virupaksh, the mountain dikpal of the eastern side. In reverence they gave a round 
to Virupaksh dikpal and moved further. 


Ttm I 


It is said the earth quake (1-40-15) mostly happens because of movement in the 
eastern mountain dikpal. Scouring towards rasatal they went south and met 
Mahapdma mountain dikpal , and on moving towards west they got Saumanas 
mountain dikpal. On the northern side they met Bhadr dikpal, a snow mountain. 
Paying their respects to the dikpal they scoured north-east and reached the 
hermitage of Kapila. To their pleasant surprise they spotted the ygya horse grazing 
around. Holding the horse in their possession they suspected Kapila to be the culprit 
and addressing harsh words they rushed towards to him. The sage, to protect 


Page 18 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


himself against their attack, produced great nasal sound exhaling the 
breath(breathing out - hunkar ), and all the mighty princes turned into the heaps of 
burnt ashes. 

1 - 41 . Anshuman found the horse (26) 

Waiting for long time, the king Sagar asked his grandson, “Your uncles are not 
coming back, go with your bow and sword and find out the horse". Anshuman found 
the route created by his uncles, and met on way the four dikpal whom when he 
saluted blessed his return soon with the horse. Moving further he could see the 
heaps of ashes and the horse grazing nearby. He wanted to offer the water oblation 
to his uncles but no water was available. In the meantime he saw the mount of 
Vishu, Garuda, the maternal uncle of his father. Garuda spoke to him, “Yours uncles 
have been victim of sage Kapila and they would only be emancipated by the holy 
water of Ganga, the elder daughter of Himvan. You go with the horse and let your 
father conclude the ygya and thereafter arrange to get Ganga to emancipate those 
prices.” Anshuman swiftly came back with the horse and narrated to his grandfather, 
the king Sagar what had happened and how Garuda had helped him. After 
concluding the ygya, the king thought much about the bringing of Ganga but he 
couldn’t and after thirty thousand years he left for heavenly abode. 

1 - 42 . Brahma blessed Bhageerath (25) 

Anshuman living for thirty two thousand years departed for heaven. His son Dilip also 
lived for thirty two thousand years and went to heaven but couldn’t get Ganga down 
to earth. Bhageerath son of Dilip undertook a severe penance for thousands of years 
standing inside five-fires and Brahma appeared before him asking for boons. He 
sought two boons: (i) to get Ganga on earth for emancipation of his grand fathers, 
and (ii) for a child since he was issuelss." Brahma granted him two boons and 
advised him to pray Shiva to hold the thrust of Ganga falling from heaven for the 
earth was incapable of containing the mighty fall. 

1 - 43 . Ganga descended (41) 

Bhageerath engaged for one year in deep penance pleased Shiva who received 
Ganga over his head. While coming down Ganga had a pride of sweeping away Shiva, 
who sensing her ego, arrested her in his endless hair locks for pretty long time. Again 
Bhageerath prayed Shiva and he dropped her in Bindu lake from there came out seven 
streams; three in the east: ahladini, pavini, nalini\ three in the west: suchakshu, seetha, 
sindhu, and one behind Bhageerath in the south. On way the holy river absolved several sinners 
off their sins who moved to heaven. Thus gushing behind the chariot of Bhageerath she inundated the 
ashram of the sage Jahnu. Enraged sage, on her audacity, drank her away completely. On the request 
of gods and sages Jahnu released her from his ears, and thereafter she came to be known as jahnavi. 
Streaming behind Bhageerath, she reached the confluence of ocean from where down below in 
the netherworld, the Bhargeerath’s grandfathers ashes were lying. Her touch emancipated 
them to heaven. 


Page 19 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


1-44. Water oblation by Bhageerath ( ) (23) 

While Bhageerath with Ganga was at the site of princes in ash, Brahma appeared 
and lauded Bhageerath for fetching Ganga to the earth. He advised him, “Take bath 
in the water and offer oblation to your parents. The deed which you performed could 
not be performed by any of your forefathers even if they were very capable. The 
credit goes to you only.” Saying thus Brahma went away to his abode. Bhageerath 
also performing the rituals came back to his kingdom. 

Vishwamitr concluded the legend about Ganga since evening had set in and it was 
time for sandhya. Before closing he mentioned that those who listen the legend of 
descent of Ganga would be blessed with his cherished desires in life. 

1-45. Ocean churning ( samudra manthan ) (45) 

Getting up next morning and on completion of the normal worship Ram expressed, “ 
Lakshaman and me spent the night like one moment reflecting the performance of 
Bhageerath fetching Ganga to this world.” Later, they crossed the Ganga by boat 
brought by local hermits in honour of Vishwamitr. Arriving on the northern side of the 
Ganga they could spot a city called Vishala. Ram politely submitted to know the 
details about that city. Vishwamitr mentioned that it was inhabited by Indra. Story 
goes that Sage Kashyap had two wives Diti and Aditi. Both were daughters of 
Daksha. From Diti demons were born and from Aditi gods were born. Both demons 
and gods wanted to be immortal and for this they needed ambrosia. They began 
exploring the ambrosia and launched a joint venture of churning the ocean. One 
hundred and eight hooded snake’s king, Vasuki was used as a stirring rope and 
mandrachal was the stirrer. After lapse of some years of churning, Vasuki getting fed 
up of friction of rotating the stirrer began vomiting deadly poison which created great 
havoc. Gods rushed to Shiva for help and Vishnu also appeared there at that time. 
He praised Shiva and advocated on behalf of gods to help them. Saying that he 
disappeared. Shiva helped them by consuming the poison. When the churning 
resumed the stirrer began sinking downward. On the request of gods, Vishnu in the 
form of a tortoise held the stirrer mandrachal in stable condition. He also held and 
pressed by his own hand the top of mandrachal to keep it stable. On years of 
churning Dhanvantri, the doyen of life science ( ayur ved) appeared with dand (arm 
resting stick) and kamandal (cylindrical water pot) in his hands. Next, celestial girls 
came out of the churning. They were sixty million including their attendants, some of 
them accepted to be consort of gods, and some accepted demons while others 
remained unallied to anyone. Then came out Varuni, the daughter of Varun who 
rejected by demons was accepted by gods. Varuni literally means liquor (sura), and 
since demons didn’t accept her, they were named asura, and gods accepting her 
became sura. Further products coming out of the churning were ucchaishrva (horse), 
and kaushtabha (diamond) followed by ambrosia ( amrit ). For the possession of amrit 
both sura and asura began fighting which continued for hundreds of years. Vishnu 
appeared in the form of a charming woman, Mohini, and took the possession of amrit 


Page 20 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


as both of them surrendered before her majestic personality. Gods came out 
victorious in the war and Indra being their leader ruled over all the worlds. 

1 - 46 . Indra tried to destroy Diti’s womb (23) 

In the war of gods and demons the loss was more on demons’ side. Diti the mother 
of demons prayed her husband Kashyap to bless her with a son to kill Indra as he 
killed her several sons. Kashyap asked her to maintain one thousand years austerity 
if she wanted a son of her choice. She agreed and patting her Kashyap left for his 
penance. She then moved into the place called kushplva to undertake her austere 
penance for son. “That place kushplva is this Vishala city” , said Vishwamitr to Ram. 
He continued the story further that Indra came to serve Diti. It was about ten years 
left that Diti revealed to Indra, “I have completed the vow and now only after ten 
years I would deliver a son who would be world winner. Indra, if you keep him in 
confidence, you two together can rule the universe.” It so happened that during mid 
day, once she fell asleep while her head was on foot-side of the cot. Taking this 
opportunity as breach in her austerity, Indra entered her womb and began splitting 
the foetus into pieces by his multi-edged bolt. On being split the foetus began 
weeping bitterly on which Indra forbade them to weep and split them into seven 
pieces. Diti awoke and she began crying, “The foetus is not worthy of killing.” 
Hearing that Indra dropped out of her womb holding blood stained bolt in his hand. 
He told her that since she breached austerity he split the foetus into pieces who was 
supposed to kill me in war field. 

1 - 47 . More about Vishal city (22) 

Diti accepted her lapse in the austerity and didn’t find any fault with Indra. She asked 
him, “Let the seven of them be divine gods. As Indra told them in womb “ma rud, ma 

rud" which meant “don’t weep ”, so they would be known by name marud. They 

all would be wind god and one of them would be positioned in Brahma lok, second 
one with you, the third one in the entire universe and the balance four shall rule the 
wind movement in four cardinal directions.” Agreeing to her proposal both left this 
place for heavenly abode. 

Vishamitra continued, “This place of austerity of Diti where Indra served her, was 
later occupied by the king Ikshavaku (other than solar dynasty of Ram) whose son 
from his wife Malubisha was called Vishal and he established this city. From Vishal 
came the lineage like this: Hemchandra, Suchandra, Dhumrashwa, Srinjay, Sahdev, 
Kushasva, Somdatt, Kakutasth, and Sumati.” 

The sage told, “ The last one Sumati is now the king of the city. We will stay here 
tonight and tomorrow we will go to see the king Janak.” In the meantime, the king 
Sumati learnt about the arrival of Vishwamitr and he came to greet the sage. 


Page 21 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


1 - 48 . Legend of Ahlya (33) 

King Sumati after welcoming and offering his prayer to the sage Vishwamitr wanted 
to know about Ram and Lakshaman who prevailed upon his attention. Vishwamitr 
introduced them as sons of king Dasarath and they had come to help him perform 
ygya at siddhashram after killing the demons. Sumati accorded a warm royal 
welcome to Ram and Lakshaman. 

Next day receiving warm send off Vishwamitr moved towards Mithila. On way, on the 
outer access to Mithila, they passed through a hermitage which was attractive but 
desolate. Ram enquired about that. Vishwamitr narrated, “ Gautam and his wife 
Ahlya stayed here for meditation. Once Indra in the guise of Gautam entered the 
hermitage and requested Ahlya for copulation. Ahlya could realize that the disguised 
person was Indra but not her husband Gautam. She still consented and when Indra 
was coming out of the hermitage, Gautam arrived after river bath carrying ygya wood 
and grass in his hands and body wet with water. He could spot Indra and cursed him 
for assuming his form and copulating with his wife. By his curse, the testicles of Indra 
fell on the ground. The sage then cursed his wife Ahlya to remain there invisible 
smeared with dust remaining on air without food and water for a long period until 
Ram came to liberate her. Saying thus he went to Himalaya.” 

1 - 49 . Ahlaya’s emancipation (22) 

Indra appealed to fellow gods for he had lost his testicles due to curse of Gautam. 
The gods lead by fire-god went to the god of birth, Prajapti. He advised to transplant 
the testicle of sheep to Indra. Accordingly Indra got the testicles of sheep. 

Vishwamitr advised Ram to enter the ashram and liberate her. When Ram entered 
the asharm, she became visible to both the brothers and they touched her feet in 
reverence. Realizing the end of her plight and advent of Ram, She rose and offered 
proper ritual respect by arghya , and padya. At the same time, Gautam also arrived 
there and became united with his wife and expressed his obligation to Ram for 
making his words true. Thereafter Vishwamitr moved towards Mithila. 

1 - 50 . Janak greeted Vishwamitr (25) 

Vishwamitr accompanying Ram and Laskhamana reached the venue of ygya 
situated in north-east of Mithila. Seeing the venue Ram expressed his high 
impression where hundreds of Brahmins were engaged for the success of the vedic 
ritual. All of the ygya related priests were given due place of stay. Vishwamitr also 
selected one quiet place near water body for their stay. Janak heard about the arrival 
of Vishwamitr. He came with many priests lead by Shatanad to greet him. When the 
initial procedure of welcome was over and all were seated, Janak wanted to know 
about the two young charming persons Ram and Lakshaman accompanying the 
sage. Vishwamitr introduced, “They are the sons of king Dasarath. With their 
assistance I could perform my ygya and they killed the demons. On way they had 


Page 22 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


visited city of Vishal, and thereafter, emancipated Ahlya. They are here to have 
glimpse of the great bow of Shiva.” 

1 - 51 . Shatanand elaborated on Vishwamitr ( 28) 

Shatanad being the eldest son of Gautam and Ahlya, praised Ram and Vishwamitr 
for showing grace on his mother. He continued to introduce in detail about 
Vishwamitr who fortunately blessed Ram with his ascetic potential. Shatanand 
continued, “The brain child of Prajapati was Kush whose son was Kushnabh. Gadhi 
was the son of Kushnabh and from Gadhi is born Vishwamtir. He ruled as a great 
king for thousands of years. Once while roaming around with his royal entourage he 
happened to sight the hermitage of Vashishtha which was a virtual new world where 
scores of ascetics viz., Balkhlya, Vaikhanas among many others were seen 
engaged in offering oblations into fire. The hermitage was a retiring friendly place for 
herds of animals, birds and other wild creatures forgetting their natural enmity. The 
place was full of varieties of fruits bearing trees. Nothing was seen wanting there." 

1 - 52 . Shatanand continued on Vishwamitr ( 23) 

Vashishth accorded proper welcome to the king Vishwamitr. When occupied their 
respective seats, they exchanged enquiries of welfare of each side. Vashishth 
offered initially fruits and water to treat his guest and requested further to stay at the 
hermitage and he would make all efforts to provide royal facilities. First Vishwamitr 
thanked him and asked for leave but when repeated for stay by Vashishth he 
accepted his invitation. Vashishth invoked the celestial cow Shabala to take proper 
care of the sage among kings, Vishwamitr and his royal entourage accompanying 
him. 

1 - 53 . Shatanand continued Seeking of celestial cow (25) 

The entire entourage of Vishwamitr received due royal greetings and were highly 
satisfied by the hospitality of Vashishth. Vishwamitr spoke to Vashishth, “I including 
my ministers, army, royal ladies and armies are glad with your hospitability. I seek 
the transfer of this cow to me and in return I can give one million cows.” Vashishth 
didn’t agree for that barter and said, “This cow is my life. All my vedic practices are 
due to her. She is my swaha, swasta, homa, japa and all. I can’t spare her.” 
Vishwamitr again sought the cow and offered 14 thousand elephants, 800 chariots, 
1100 horses, 10 million cows all duly decorated with gold and gems. He also offered 
to meet the unlimited demand for gold and gems in lieu of this cow. Vashishth very 
clearly denied sparing the cow at any cost. 

1 - 54 . Shatanand continued Vishwamitr fought for the cow (23) 

Vishwamitr grabbed the cow forcibly. When the cow saw her being dragged by the 
royal forces she piteously looked to Vashsisth and spoke as to why he deserted her. 
She freed herself from them and came running to Vashishth. Lying on his feet she 
asked, “What is my fault that you discarded me?” The sage replied, “No, nothing, no 


Page 23 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


fault of yours. It is the forceful act of Vishwamitr, he is dragging you away from me. I 
am helpless against the royal strength.” The cow reminded Vashisth, “The potential 
of a sage is unbeatable and he can’t win me from you.” Vashishth asked her to 
produce the forces to fight the royal army. The cow did that by her nasal sound and 
hundreds of pahalva forces came out and destroyed completely the army of 
Vishwamitr. Seeing that Vishamitr became angry and taking that as a challenge 
defying his status he began charging his mighty missiles destroying the forces 
produced by the cow. The cow then produced ferocious shaka and yavana fully 
equipped to fight Vishwamitr. The king using his missiles scattered the newly created 
forces. 

1 - 55 . Shatanand continued Vishwamitr took to penance (28) 

Again the cow brought forth the reinforcements from her various parts of the body 
varieties of warriors and that destroyed the royal army of Vishwamitr. Hundreds of 
sons of Vishwamitr rushed to Vashith in retaliation. The nasal sound of the sage 
burnt them to ashes. Lost immensely at the hands of Vashishth, Vishwamitr offered 
the kingdom to his one surviving son and went to forest to please Shiva by his 
penance. When Shiva appeared and asked for boon, he asked for all weapons in 
possession of all sorts of creatures on the earth to come in his possession. Shiva 
granted him all. Vishwamitr came forth to the hermitage of Vashishth and used the 
rare weapons to destroy completely the hermitage. The birds, animals, priests and 
sages began running away from there. Although Vashishth asked the fleeing sages 
and ashram inhabitants to stay, it was in vain. Soon the hermitage of Vashishth 
became a desolated and deserted place. Enraged sage then took his ascetic rod in 
his hand which looked like the fire-ball of the ultimate end of time and universe. 

1 - 56 . Shatanand continued Vishwamitr grounded ( 24 ) 

Vishwamitr used all sorts of missiles, shafts, tridents, chakra on Vashishth but all 
were absorbed by his ascetic rod. Lastly Vishwamitr charged Brahma’s missile and 
that too diffused in front of the sage. Vashishth body began glowing with radiance of 
his potency which was unbearable for the universe. Gods and sages prayed him to 
calm down. Vishwamitr condemned his fighting potentiality and surrendered before 
the radiance of an ascetic. 

1 - 57 . Shatanand continued Trishanku met Vashishth (22) 

Vishwamitr went towards the southern side and under took a severe penance. 
Pleased with his penance, Brahma appeared and blessed him to be raj-rishi (king 
among sages). Vishwamitr was dejected since after such a hard penance he couldn’t 
win the title of brahm-rishi from Brahma, and again resumed his peance for the 
higher goal. In the meanwhile, a king of Ikshavaku dynasty, Trishanku, came to 
Vashishth and expressed his desire to perform such ygya or ritual which could bring 
him bodily to heaven. Vashishth denied fulfilling his wish, and whereupon Trishanku 
came to hundred sons of Vashishth engaged in penance and austerity. They too 


Page 24 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


couldn’t help him, rather cursed him to become a chandal, a disgraceful social 
stigma. 

1-58. Shatanand continued Trishanku to Vishwamtir ( 24) 

Trishanku thus cursed by the sons of royal mentor came back to his capital. Next day 
he turned into a chandal, with all his cloths turned black. Seeing his transformation 
into unacceptable form of a chandal, his ministers and royal assistants deserted him. 
Trishanku didn’t lose his heart. He came to Vishwmaitr and narrated what had 
happened with him and he mentioned, “Luck is the supreme, nothing can prevail 
upon it. Although I performed several ygya and vedic rituals my desire of going bodily 
to heaven has brought upon me this status of a chandal." 

1-59. Shatanand continued Vishwamitr organized ygya (22) 

Vishwamitr sent his sons and disciples to invite sages including the sons of 
Vashishth. Sages began arriving. Some of the disciples who had gone to invite son 
of Vashishth, came back and spoke to Vishwamitr, “The sons of Vashishth has 
condemned this ygya where the head organizer is kshatriya and the host is chandal, 
Trishanku." Vishwamitr in anger hurled host of curses on them denouncing their 
mentality. 

1-60. Shatanand continued Trishanku pushed back from heaven (34) 

Vishwamitr addressed the sages who had gathered at his behest. When he 
mentioned that he wanted to perform a vedic ritual which could send Trishanku 
bodily to heaven, those sages became skeptical, but afraid of his curse agreed to act 
what he wanted. The ygya commenced, and when the share of various gods were 
offered invoking them to accept their oblation, non turned up. Enraged Vishwamitr 
didn’t care gods not accepting his invocation, and using his ascetic power, 
pronounced mantra to send Trishanku to heaven. Trishanku rose and reached the 
realms of heaven but Indra threw him down from there since he was tainted with the 
curse of chandal from his mentors. Trishanku, upside down cried for help and 
Vishwamitr with his potential stopped him in space in the same condition upside 
down. Vishwamitr began creating parallel heaven by creating galaxy of stars, 
saptrishi mandal all in the southern hemisphere because north was occupied with 
the existing godly creation. Trishanku stayed there amidst newly created galaxy of 
stars by Vishwamitr. The ritual concluded and the invitees were bade farewell. 

1-61. Shatanand continued Ambrish in search of the ritual animal (24) 

Vishwamitr then left that southern direction and moved to western zone full of forests 
with lakes. He began his penance with light food of fruits on the side of one of the 
lakes. At the same time the king of Ayodhya, called Ambrish had commenced ygya 
and the ygya horse was stolen by Indra. He was not able to locate the horse. His 
priests steering the ygya told that in substitute any human being could also be used 
as ritual animal. Ambrish began the search for such a substitute. He reached 


Page 25 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


Bhrugu-tung a mountain top where the sage Richika was staying with his family. He 
sought the sage for selling one his sons as a substitute for ritual animal. ( Richika is 
husband of satyvathi sister of vishwamitr). The sage spoke to Ambrish, “I can’t share my 
eldest son.” His wife spoke, “ I can’t share the youngest son, Shunak.” The middle 
son, Sunahshep spoke, “ Father can’t share the eldest one, and the mother sticks to 
the youngest son. It means I am available.” He agreed to go with the king Ambrish. 
The king offered lot of gold, gems, one hundred thousand cows to the sage and 
moved with Sunahshep towards his ygya venue. 

1-62. Shatanand continued Ambrish performed ygya (28) 

While coming to the venue with Sunahshep, the king stopped on way for rest. 
Coincidently, Vishwamitr was doing penance in the nearby. Sunahshep went to him 
and fell in his lap saying he was going as a ritual animal for the ygya of Ambrish. 
Vishwamitr asked his sons who were with him doing penance to go as substitute of 
Sunhshep because they were accomplished ones after doing so long penance. 
Madhusyand and his other sons replied collectively to him that for saving Sunahshep 
why did he want to sacrifice one of his sons. Vishwamitr became angry and cursed 
them that like sons of Vashishth they would fall in the cycle of birth and death and 
keep subsisting on the meat of dogs. He then gave two vedic hymns to Sunahshep 
which would provide him longevity. He spoke to Sunahshep, “ When you are made 
ready and fixed to the Vishnu-post, recite these hymns.” Sunhashep came to 
Ambrish and moved to the ygya place. When the ygya resumed and turn of 
Sunhshep came as a ritual animal, he recited those hymns taught by Vishwamitr. 
Indra hearing those hymns protected and blessed him for long life. Ambrish also got 
the fruits of the ygya by the grace of Indra. Vishwamitr continued his penance for 
another thousand years by remaining near the lakes. 

1-63. Shatanand continued Vishwamitr and Menaka (26) 

When Vishwamitr completed the penance and took bath on the conclusion, gods 
appeared. Brahma addressed him as a great saint ( rishi bhadram). He was not 
satisfied with this title. He continued his penance further. In the meanwhile one day 
he saw Menaka the celestial girl swimming in the lake. He was overwhelmed by her 
beauty and asked her to stay there. He was diverted with her and thus ten years 
rolled out. The sage realized this hindrance created by gods. He became repentant. 
Menaka stood before him with folded hands and he pardoned her and moved to the 
northern Himalaya for further penance. 

On the bank of river Kaushaki he undertook the penance for one thousand years. 
Gods approached Brahma to bestow the title of maharshi on him. Brahma came to 
him with the gods and addressed him as maharshi, but he was not satisfied. He 
wanted to be addressed as brahmrishi. Brahma told that for becoming brahmrshi he 
was required to be really victor of senses. Saying thus Brahma left the place. 


Page 26 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


Vishwamitr undertook rigorous penance further by raising both his arms up and 
remaining only on air. He remained in fire in summer, in open sky in rains, in water in 
winter. 

1-64. Shatanand continued Rambha cursed (20) 

Afraid of Vishwamitr accomplishments Indra commissioned Rambha to interfere his 
penance. Initially she was afraid of the sage’s ire, but Indra spoke to her, “ I would 
accompany you as a sweet-word bird, and love-god would also be there in similar 
guise.” Vishwamitr heard of sweet melodious chirping of birds. He then spotted 
Rambha in her charming physique. Immediately sensing the Indra’s traps for him, he 
cursed Rambha to become mass of rock. When Rambha turned into rock, Indra and 
love god fled away from there. Vishwamitr realized his fault of getting prevailed upon 
by anger. He resolved to continue the penance for another one thousand years 
maintaining the state of breathlessness, until he attained the brahamrishi title. 

1-65. Shatanand concluded Vishwamitr became Brahmarishi ( 40) 

Vishwamitr continued his vow of rigorous penance of keeping silence and 
breathlessness. It was end of one thousand years. He cooked his food and was 
about to eat that Indra disguised as a Brahmin came supplicating for food. He gave 
all to the Brahmin and again resumed his penance for another stint of observing 
complete rigors. 

The fumes and radiance sprang forth from his head. Gods were feared. Physical 
world was affected by this extraordinary development. The gods gathered before 
Brahma and narrated the developments taking place due to Vishwamitr’s penance. 
Brahma arrived near Vishwamitr and addressed him as Brahmrishi. Vishwamitr with 
folded hands expressed his obligation to Brahma but sought his blessing for being 
accepted as brahmrishi by the great sage Vashishth also. Gods invoked Vashishth 
and he addressed Vishwamitr as brahmrishi. Both patched up their old bitterness 
and became friends. 

Shatanand concluded the legend on Vishwamitr mentioning, “He is an ace ascetic 
full of fortitude and rectitude. Ram and Lakshaman luckily got a great guide." King 
Janak offered his due reverence to Vishwamitr and expressed, “ I am fortunate that 
my ygya has been graced by such a great sage.” He giving rounds of Vishwmaitr 
took his leave to see him tomorrow morning as the evening had already set in. 
Vishwamitr with Ram and Lakshaman came to the place of stay. 

1-66. Shiva’s bow shown to Ram (26) 

Next day morning completing the daily rites Vishwamitr with Ram and Lakshaman 
met Janak. Janak asked what was command of the sage for him. The sage advised 
the king to show them the Shiva’s bow. Before they were taken to see the bow, 
Janak narrated the story. He mentioned, “Shiva was furious when his share was not 
placed in the ygya of Daksha. Shiva stretched this bow and cautioned gods that he 


Page 27 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


was going to split their heads for the fault of ignoring his share of oblation in the 
ygya. On begging of pardon, Shiva forgave them and he gave this bow to gods. 
Gods in turn handed over the bow to one of my forefathers, Devarat.” 

After ploughing the field I got a daughter, called Sita. I wanted to marry her with the 
one possessed of unique valour. Several kings came to give their test of valour by 
way of lifting this bow. None could do that. In anguish they got united against me and 
laid a siege of my city a year ago. With the help of celestial army I could scatter 
them. Janak continued, “If Ram strings this bow, I would offer my daughter to him.” 

1 - 67 . Ram and the Shiva’s bow (27) 

Janak commanded the ministers to bring the bow which was smeared with paste of 
sandal and wrapped in garland. Five thousand tall persons pulled the eight wheeled 
casket containing the bow from the palace chamber to the court hall. Janak indicated 
to Vishwamitr that the bow might be shown to the princes. 

On the initiative of Vishwamitr Ram moved forward and upon lifting the lid of the 
casket had a glance of the bow. He inquisitively asked the permission to get a touch 
of the bow by his hand and take out to feel its divinity. Both Janak and Vishwamitr 
consented simultaneously, “All right." 

He pulled out the bow holding from its centre in the presence of thousands of people 
in the hall. When after fixing he stretched the string the bow broke from its centre 
with a loud deafening sound as if the earth had split due to quaking mountains. 
Except Vishwamitr, Janak and the two brothers, others were swooned by the sound. 
Janak was very happy by this incident, and he immediately made a proposal for 
sending his ministers to Ayodhya to bring the king for solemnizing the marriage of 
Sita with Ram. Vishwamitr consented and soon the royal messengers left for 
Ayodhya to apprise the king Dasarth with the entire development in detail and invite 
him to Mithila for marriage of Ram and Sita. 

1 - 68 . Dasarath invitated (19) 

The royal messengers of Mithila riding the chariots spent three nights en route before 
they entered Ayodhya. Welcoming them, they were brought before the elderly king 
Dasarath in his court. They narrated the eventful happening of Ram breaking the 
bow of Shiva for which the king Janak had vowed that he would marry his daughter 
who could be of valour to string the bow. They narrated, “Several kings in the past 
couldn’t even pull out the bow out of the casket. They collectively, after their failure, 
charged a siege of Mithila which the king Janak dealt successfully. The marriage 
proposal of Sita to Ram by king Janak has been sanctified by Shatanand and 
endorsed by Vishwamitr. Kindly accept the invitation and leave for Mithila with your 
royal preceptor, ministers and well wishers at the earliest to solemnize the marriage 
under your care.” 


Page 28 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


King Dasarath was happy to learn about the presence of his two sons under care of 
sage Vishwamitr at Mithila. He immediately consulted Vamdeva and Vashishth and 
the ministers. They welcome the proposal and the king announced to set out for 
Mithila tomorrow morning. The messengers received royal treatment and spent their 
night awaiting the break of auspicious dawn. 

1 - 69 . Dasarth arrived in Mithila (19) 

The king summoned Sumantr, his counselor, and asked him to arrange expeditiously 
adequate gold, gem etc to be distributed at Janakpur and the consignment must 
move before we move. He asked, “The chariots of Vashsith, Vamdev, Jabali, 
Kashyap, Markadeya and other venerable priests shall procede my chariot. All four 
types of army contingent shall accompany the procession.” Accordingly the king set 
out for Mithila and arrived there in four days. King Janak heard their arrival and came 
forward on the outskirt to receive them. They were warmly ushered in Mithila. Janaka 
proposed, “Tomorrow let the sages decide the date and time of marriage which 
should be solemnized at the earliest within three four days.” The king Dasarath 
consented to his proposal. The coming together of saints and sages at Mithila was 
very enjoying to them. Vishwamitr leding Ram and Lakshaman came to see the king 
Dasarath who was glad to see his two sons when they touched his feet. Happily, 
they retired for night’s rest. 

Janak performed several vedic rituals for the upcoming events for his two daughters 
1-69-19) and thereafter satisfactorily went to sleep. 

1 - 70 . Pre-wedding preparations, forefathers of Dasarath (45) 

In the morning, the king Janak spoke to the royal priest Shatanand, “My brother, 
Kushadhwaj, staying at Sankasya is surrounded by the river Ikshumati. The floating 
lotus around the city gives an impression as if city is riding a pushpak viaman. He is 
performer of the ongoing vedic ygya, and he will also extend help in the wedding 
ceremony. Let him be informed by a messenger to come here immediately.” 
Shatadand called a messenger who on the command of Janak went fast to Sanksya. 
On hearing the message, Kshdhwaj immediately arrived at Mithila. Both the brothers 
then after interacting between themselves sent Sudaaman, the wise minister of 
Mithila to invite the king Dasarath with Vashishth and other sages. 

As commanded by Janak, Sudaman, came to submit the message to Dasarath. 
Immediately Dasarath with Vashishth and other sages arrived at the Janak’s place. 
Dasarath initiated, “Vashishth is the royal priest and preceptor of Ikshavaku family, 
and he will introduce about my forefathers in presence of the sages.” Vishwamitr 
consented to his proposal by nodding. 

Vashishth narrated the family tree thus, “The sequence is like this: Brahma, Marichi, 
Kashyap, Vivasvaan (the sun), Manu, Ikshavaaku, Kukshi, Vikushi, Baan, Anrnya, 
Prithu, Trishanku, Dhundhimaar, Yuvanaashwa, Asit, Mandhaataa, and Susandhi. 


Page 29 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


Susandhi had got two sons Dhruvasandhi and Presenjit. Bharat was born from 
Dhruvasandhi and his son was Asit. The foreign tribes of Haihaya and Taljangha, 
attacked over Asit and dethroned him. The king Asit, exiled in forest, breathed his 
last while his two wives were pregnant in the forest. One queen by jealousy gave 
poison to the other queen, the co-wife of the departed king, but the sage Chyavan 
who was staying in the nearby hermitage saved her and assured that the poison 
would do no harm to the child in the womb. When the child was born from her he 
was called Sagar (*r + m which means with poison; refer 1-38 for more details). While 
being reared up under the sage Chyavan, the child Sagar learnt all about the archery 
and other warfare skills besides the scriptures. He learnt in course of time about the 
dethronement of his father and winning over the enemies he restored the kingdom 
of his father in his possession. Further lineage coming from Sagar: Asamanj, 
Ansuman, Dilip, Bhageerath, Kakutstha, Raghu, Pravridha (his another name was 
Kalmashpaad and due to curse of Vashishth he had become a demon staying on 
the human flesh), Sankhan, Sudarshan, Agnivarna, Shighrag, Maru, Prashruk, 
Ambreesha, Nahush, Yayati, Naabhaag, Aj, Dasarath. From Dasarath is these two 
brothers Ram and Lakshaman who are quite matching to be married to the 
daughters of Janak. “ 

1 - 71 . Janak enumerated his forefathers (24) 

After listening Vashishth, Janak, as a customary practice of the wedding, put a 
cursory description of his forefathers. His forefathers enlisted by him is in the order: 
“ Nimi, Mithi, Janak, Udavasu, Nandivardhan, Suketu, Devarat, Brihadrath, Mahavir, 
Sudhriti, Dhrishtketu, Haryasva, Maru, Pratindhak, Kirtirath, Devamidh, Bibudha, 
Mahidhrak, Kirtiraata, Mahaaroma, Swarnroma, and Hrisvaroma.” Janak 
continued, “ I and Kushadhwaj are the sons of Hrisvaroma. My father crowning me 
as the king, and handing over my younger brother Kushadhwaj to me, went to 
forest. 

Once Sudhanva asked me to handover the bow of Shiva and Sita to him. When I 
refused he attacked and he was killed in the battlefield. Thereafter, I crowned 
Kushdhwaj as the king of Sudhanva’s Sankasya. 

Janak confirming the wedding to be held mentioned, “ I offer my daughter to Ram, 
and Urmila to Lakshaman. Today is Magha nakshatra , and on the third day in the 
period of Uttra Phalguni, I propose the marriage to be solemnized.” 

1 - 72 . Vishwamitr proposed the marriage of daughters of Kushadhwaj (25) 

On conclusion of Janak’s submission, Vishwamir mentioned to Janak, “Both the 
royal houses of Ikshvaku and Nimi are great. It is auspicious that they now shall 
have the marriage relationship. I also propose that Kushidhwaj has two daughters 
and let them be married with Bharat and Shatrughn.” This was consented by 
Vashiahth. Janak readily agreed to the proposal. Dasarath praising the two sages, 
proposed to proceed with necessary rituals in this regard. Being lead by two sages, 


Page 30 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


he left for his place of stay. In the morning of the other day, as a preparatory ritual to 
the upcoming wedding, he donated besides huge sum of wealth, thousands of well 
decorated cows to Brahmins and sages. 

1 - 73 . The Wedding (40) 

In the morning when the king Dasarath had performed liberal donations, there 
arrived Yudhaajit, the prince of Kekaya region, and maternal uncle of Bharat. 
Dasarath welcoming him asked the welfare of his father and relatives. Yudhaajit 
spoke, “My father wanted to see Bharat. I came to Ayodhya to take him to 
Kekaya desh. I learnt about their marriage here in Mithila, and I came here." 

The king Dasarath after staying that day with joy, spent the night. The morning of 
the wedding day arrived and he with his entourage moved to the ritual hall and 
advised Vashishth to enquire about the status of wedding solemnization. 
Vashishth coming to the marriage hall enquired from the king Janak about the 
preparations. Janak informed him, “Everything is ready. My daughters have 
already arrived at the fire quarters. I welcome you all here now with the 
bridegrooms." When Vashishth informed the king Dasarth about the 
preparations, with all his four sons and keeping the sages in the forefront 
Dasarath arrived at the wedding venue. Vashishth in presence of fire in the fire 
quarters, sanctified all the ritual articles and varieties of pots with grass, rice and 
water. 

Janak brought Sita fully bejeweled in royal clothes. Ram with four brothers were 
also dressed up well with all sorts of jewels and clothes. Janak offered the hand 
of Sita to Ram mentioning, “She is your wife and would remain with you like your 
shadow." He offered her to Ram with the recitation of hymns and pouring of 
water in their joined palms. Similarly he handed over the hands of Urmila to 
Lakshaman, Mandavi to Bharat, Shrutkriti to Shatrughn. All the four pairs gave 
three rounds (1-73-39) to the sacred fire. Gods showered flowers and the 
melodious sound of divine music permeated throughout the period of wedding. 

Sages lead the procession with Dasarath and the four pairs arrived with them to 
the place of stay. The king’s eyes had no saturation of the auspicious sights of 
the four pairs, and he kept gazing at them. 

1 - 74 . Prashuram (24) 

Next day early in the morning, Vishwamitr took leave of the king and moved out 
to the north. The king Dasarath also took leave of Janak and set out for Ayodhya. 
While giving farewell to his daughters Janak gifted them with huge wealth of 
gems, gold, silver and precious items. Thousands of cows, horses, elephants, 
chariots and several other valuable items were gifted. 

On way Dasarath noticed birds creating loud noise around him, while the animals 
were running on his right. He enquired from Vashishth whether auspiciousness 


Page 31 of 33 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


would be maintained on way. Vashishth explained, “Birds indicate some 
disturbance, while the animals annul the bad omens and prevalence of 
auspiciousness.” In the meanwhile there arrived Prashuram with lightening 
brilliance holding pharsa (double arched sharp steel weapon with a handle) in his 
right hand, while his left hand held the bow and arrow. Sages began offering 
prayer to him with respectful ritual of water ( arghya , and padya). While the sages 
doubted, “Whether he would again resume his previous action of killing kshatriya” 
, Prashuram moved to Ram. 

1 - 75 . Prashuram continued (28) 

He told to Ram, “ I have heard about your potential and performances, including 
the breaking of Shiva’s bow among the several others. As a further test case, the 
bow I am holding is of Vishnu, and I give it to you for stringing it and shooting the 
shaft." King Dasarath, desperately interfered with his polite submission to 
Prashuram, “My son is yet like a child. You had given words to Indra not to kill 
kshatriya any more. Besides after killing the kshatriya several times you have 
already gifted the earth to Kashyap, and taken ultimate refuge to the mount 
Mahendra. Have pity on my son.” 

Prashuram ignoring the Dasarath’s intervention continued, “The celestial smith, 
Viswkarma had prepared two bows. Gods gave one to Shiva and the 

other to Vishnu. Shiva used the bow to kill the demon Tripura. Gods gathered at 
Brahma’s place and wanted to know who was mightier, Shiva or Vishnu. Brahma 
to quell their query for ever scripted a drama between Shiva and Vishnu causing 
them to fight. Both of them presented an excellent fight and in doing so when 
Vishnu produced a nasal sound, the third eye of Shiva got frozen. He 
surrendered and Vishnu became victorious. Shiva gifted his bow to the king of 
Vidheh, Devarat. Vishnu also gifted his bow to Jamdagni, son of the sage 
Richika. Jamdagni being my father, I got this bow. My father had quit using the 
weapons, and finding him alone meditating Kritvirya Arjun, beheaded him. In 
retaliation I cleared this earth several times of the race of kshatriya. Now I invite 
you to take this Vishnu bow and perform as I told you to do.” 

1 - 76 . Prashuram continued (24) 

Ram praised Prashuram for paying the debt of killing of his father by eliminating 
kshatriya kings. He took that bow having a shaft on its string. He pulled the string 
and asked Prashuram where to shoot the shaft. Further he asked, “ Either it will 
destroy your mind-speed movement ability or your treasure of penance. “ 
Prashuram recalled the command of Kaashyap, “When I gifted the earth to 
Kaashyap, he asked me not to stay at night on earth. Since then I travel to mount 
Mahendra at night.” Considering his ability of movement not to be damaged, he 
asked Ram to charge the arrow to destroy his treasure of penance. He offered 


Page 32 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Balkand 


his prayer to Ram saying, “You are unparallel in the entire creation, the absolute 
Narayan Himself. No one can excel against you." 

Gods had gathered in the sky to watch this event. Ram observing his desire shot 
the shaft to devoid him of his potential of penance. In front of the presence of 
gods, Prashuram gave round to Ram and vanished in thin air for Mahendra 
mount. 

1 - 77 . Arriving back to Ayodhya (29) 

When Prashuram was gone, Ram addressed his father to issue command to the 
army to proceed towards Ayodhya. Dasarath kissed the forehead of his son, 
Ram as if he had got a gift of life from the anger of Prashuram. Soon they 
reached Ayodhya where warm welcome awaited them. All the streets were kept 
moist, decorated with urban style, strewn with arches and flowers. The king 
entered his palace and enjoyed the inner gathering of three quins Kaushlya, 
Kaikeyi and Sumitra amidst the four pair of brides and bride- grooms. The 
women folk greeted the newly-wed brides with due customary practices. 

King Dasarath advised Bharat to go with Yudhaajit to his maternal uncle’s place 
since he had come to take him there. Bharat took Shatrughn as his companion 
and seeking the leave from father, Ram, and three mothers left for Kekaya. 

Ram and Lakshaman assisted their father in his royal duties. They earned the 
love of darling from the people of Ayodhya as two brothers had always protected 
the interest of the people of state. 

The relation between Sita and Ram, day by day, grew deeper and deeper. They 
remained the heart of each other. 


Page 33 of 33 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Ayodhyakand 


Srimate Ramanuiav namah 

Preface 

Ramayan is a Sanskrit word and its literal meaning can be understood in several ways. Some of 
the relevant ones are: (i) the scripture which is abode of Lord Ram, (ii) the scripture as store 
house of glory of Lord Ram, (iii) the scripture which describes the movement of Lord Ram. 

The submission now is the second one following the first one of Baal kaand. This covers the 
condensed glory described by the sage Valmiki in Ayodhyaa kaand. The description mainly 
covers the movement of Ram in forest to honour the words of his father. His father, king Dasarath 
had given two boons to one of his queens Kaikeyi when she had extended courageous 
assistance to the king in the battle field of demons versus gods. When Dasarath made 
preparations for crowning the eldest son Ram as successor prince, Kaikeyi claimed 1 her 
unrealized boons, and she wanted (i) her son Bharat to be crowned, and (ii) Ram to be exiled in 
forest for fourteen years. With heavy heart the king had to honour the claims, and Ram happily 
cooperated with his father in accepting forest life. Accordingly Ram left for forest joined by his 
wife Sita ,and brother Lakshaman. 

Bharat was totally unaware of his mother’s claims, and he was away to his maternal uncle’s 
place. The king didn’t bear the shock of separation of Ram, and he departed to heavenly abode in 
absence of all his four sons. When Bharat came back to Ayodhya, having rejected the mother’s 
proposal, and after performing the last rites of his father, he left for forest to pursue Ram to come 
back to Ayodhya as king. Ram didn’t oblige him, and maintaining his firm resolve he stayed in 
forest. 

Ayodhyaa kaand thus initially describes in detail total developments taken place leading to 
banishment of Ram. The later part in major portion covers the details of developments taking 
place during his maiden movement to forest. Someone can prefer to call this part as nirvaasan 
kaand (banishment section) but as christened by Valmiki, all subsequent celebrated authors of 
Ramayan have retained the Valmiki’s title, of Ayodhyaa kaand. 

This kaand is second of six / seven kaand of Ramayan and has 119 chapters ( sarg ). The 
following condensed version is retained in the same sequence followed by the sage Valmiki. The 
first digit in parentheses is the number of shlok in a given sarg, and the second digit is the 
cumulative summation of shlok including the given sarg. 

Baal kand had total 77 sarg containing 2266 shlok, whereas Ayodhyaa kaand has 119 sarg with 
total shlok 4310. Total cumulative shlok of Baalkaand and Ayodhyaa kaand is 6576. The spelling 
of “Baal kaand “ and “Ayodhyaa kaand “ in the preface is to facilitate correct prevalent 
pronunciation. However, in the following text simple spelling retaining only singe “a” instead of 
double “aa” has been maintained. 

Srimann Narayan Charnau Sharnam Prapaddye. smrpt WTZ ) 

Submission: 

Srikrishna Prapnnachari 
Dhanurmas, January 11, 2010 


In sarg 107 shlok 3, Ram also revealed that besides two boons, Dasarath had married Kaikeyi pledging the kingdom to her son. 


I 




Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Ayodhyakand 


Contents 

page 

2-1 Dasarath invited elite (50 / 50) 1 

2-2 Ram to be successor prince (54 / 104) 1 

2-3 Direction for coronation arrangements (49 / 153) 2 

2-4 Ram at his mother Kauslya’s palace (45 / 198) 2 

2-5 Vashishath initiated Ram to resolve for fast (26 /224) 3 

2-6 Festivity until dawn (26 / 250) 3 

2-7 Manthra’s move (36 / 286) 4 

2-8 Cunning kubja (39 / 325) 4 

2-9 Kaikeyi in catch (66 / 391) 4 

2-10 King with Kaikeyi (40 / 431) 5 

2-11 Kaikeyi claimed boons (29 / 460) 5 

2-12 Dasarath in dilemma (114 / 574) 6 

2-13 Lamenting king (26 / 600) 6 

2-14 Knotty Kaikeyi (68 / 668) 7 

2-15 Ceremonial scene (49 / 717) 8 

2-16 Ram on call to Dasarath (47 / 764) 8 

2-17 Ram passed through crowd (22 / 786) 9 

2-18 Kaikeyi acquainted Ram with her claims (41 / 827) 9 

2-19 Ram honoured the claims ( 40 / 867) 9 

2-20 Kauslya shocked ( 55 / 922) 10 

2-21 Ram pacified Lakshaman and consoled Kauslya (63 / 985) 10 

2-22 Destiny prevailed (30 / 1015) 11 

2-23 Lakshaman rejected destiny (41 / 1056) 11 

2-24 Kauslya relented (38 / 1094) 12 

2-25 Kauslya invoked blessings (47 / 1141) 12 

2-26 Ram reached Sita (38 / 1179) 13 

2-27 Sita submitted to accompany Ram (23 / 1202) 13 

2-28 Ram counted forest constraints (26 / 1228) 13 

2-29 Sita firm for forest ( 24 / 1252) 13 

2-30 Ram relented and Sita to accompany ( 47 / 1299) 14 

2-31 Adamant Lakshaman (35 / 1334) 14 

2-32 Ram gifted precious charity (44 / 1378) 15 

2-33 Ram moved to see Dasarath (on way to forest) (31 / 1409) 15 

2-34 Ram met Dasarath ( 61 / 1470) 16 

2-35 Kaikeyi didn’t oblige Sumantra ( 37 / 1507) 16 

2-36 Kaikeyi rejected transferring treasury and army (33 / 1540) 17 

2-37 Kaikeyi gave them ascetic’s dress ( 37 / 1577 ) 17 

2-38 Dasarath to protect Kauslya ( 18 / 1595) 18 

2-39 Chariot for Ram, and Kauslya counseled Sita (41 / 1636) 18 

2- 40 Ram left the palace (51 / 1687) 19 

2-41 Mourning on departure (21 / 1708) 19 

2-42 Dasarth came lamenting to Kauslya’s palace (34 / 1742) 19 

2-43 Kausalya complained to king (21 / 1763) 20 

2-44 Sumitra assuaged Kausalya’s agony (31 / 1794) 20 

2-45 Ram arrived at Tamasa river ( 33 / 1827) 20 

2-46 Ram quit secretly ( 34 / 1861) 21 

2- 47 Accompanying crowd came back (19/ 1880) 21 


ii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Ayodhyakand 


2-48 Lamenting women of Ayodhya (37 / 1917) 21 

2-49 Ram crossed several rivers ( 18 / 1935) 22 

2-50 Ram met his fond friend Guh (51 / 1986) 22 

2-51 Night vigil by Lakshaman and Guh ( 27 / 2013) 23 

2-52 Ram crossed the Ganga ( 102 / 2115) 23 

2-53 Ram lamented at third night (35 / 2150) 24 

2-54 Ram at the hermitage of Bhardwaj (43 / 2193) 25 

2-55 On way to Chitrakoot (34 / 2227) 25 

2-56 Chitrakoot (38/2265) 26 

2-57 Sumantr reported to the King ( 34 / 2299) 27 

2-58 Dasarath again called Sumantr for report ( 37 / 2336) 27 

2-59 Frequent fits to Dasarath ( 34 / 2370) 28 

2-60 Sumantra consoled Kauslya ( 23 / 2403) 28 

2-61 Kauslya complained her helplessness ( 27 / 2430) 28 

2-62 Dasarath sought favor from Kauslya ( 21 / 2451) 28 

2-63 Dasarath recalled killing an unseen target ( 56 / 2507) 29 

2-64 Dasarath completed the story ( 79 / 2586) 29 

2-65 Dasarath passed away ( 29 / 2615) 30 

2-66 Lamenting family (29 / 2644) 30 

2-67 Sages apprehend sufferings ( 38 / 2682) 30 

2-68 The messengers to Bharat ( 22 / 2704 ) 31 

2-69 Bharat had horrible dream (21 / 2725) 31 

2-70 Bharat departed for Ayodhya (30 / 2755) 32 

2-71 Bharat on way to Ayodhya ( 47 / 2802) 32 

2-72 Kaikeyi broke the news of death of the king ( 54 / 2856) 33 

2-73 Bharat rejected the crown ( 28 / 2884) 33 

2-74 Bharat denounced his mother ( 36 / 2920) 33 

2-75 Bharat met Kausalya (65 / 2985) 34 

2-76 Bharat performed the last rites (23 / 3008) 34 

2-77 Twelfth and thirteenth day of rites ( 26 / 3034) 35 

2-78 Shatrughn reflected on Lakshaman (26 / 3060) 35 

2-79 Bharat was offered throne ( 17 / 3077) 35 

2-80 Highways cleared ( 22 / 3099) 36 

2-81 Assembly hall (16/3115) 36 

2-82 Bharat pledged to bring back Ram (32 / 3147) 36 

2-83 Bharat on move ( 26 / 3173) 37 

2-84 Guh got scared ( 18 / 3191) 37 

2-85 Guh assured help ( 22 / 3213) 37 

2-86 Guh narrated about Ram’s stay (25/ 3238) 38 

2-87 Guh continued on Ram’s stay ( 24 / 3262) 38 

2-88 Bharat vowed an ascetic life style (30 / 3292) 39 

2-89 Bharat crossed the Ganga ( 23 / 3315) 39 

2-90 Bharat at Bhardwaj ashram ( 24 / 3339) 39 

2-91 Bhardwaj hospitality (84 / 3423) 40 

2-92 Bharat took leave of Bhardwaj ( 39 / 3462) 41 

2-93 Bharat in search of Ram’s ashram (27 / 3489) 41 

2-94 Ram and Sita engaged in watching Chitrakoot (27 / 3516) 42 

2-95 Ram described the scene of Mandakini to Sita (19 / 3535) 42 

2-96 Bharat’s troops caught Ram’s attention ( 30 / 3565) 42 


iii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Ayodhyakand 


2-97 Lakshaman brought to reasons ( 31 / 3596) 42 

2-98 Anxious Bharat (13 / 3609) 43 

2-99 Union of brothers (42 / 3651) 43 

2-100 Enquiry about the state (76 / 3727) 43 

2-101 Bharat wished to crown Ram (26 / 3753) 44 

2-102 Bharat repeated his request ( 9 / 3762) 45 

2-103 Mourning for father ( 49 / 3811) 45 

2-104 Mothers at the hermitage (32 / 3843) 46 

2-105Bharat prayed Ram again (46 / 3889) 46 

2-106 Bharat pleaded in vain ( 35 / 3924) 47 

2-107 Ram’s firmness ( 19 / 3943) 47 

2-108 Jabali pleaded for crown (18 / 3961) 47 

2-109 Ram refuted Jabali (39 / 4000) 48 

2-110 Vashishath’s advice ( 36 / 4036) 48 

2-111 Ram firm on forest life (32 / 4068) 49 

2-112 Bharat left with paduka ( 31 / 4099) 49 

2-113 Salutations to Bhardwaj ( 24 / 4123) 50 

2-114 Desolate Ayodhya ( 29 / 4152) 50 

2-115 Bharat at Nandigram (27 / 4179) 51 

2-116 Sages alarmed Ram ( 26 / 4205) 51 

2-117 Arrival at Atri’s ashram (29 / 4234) 51 

2-118 Ansuya blessed Sita (54 / 4288) 52 

2-119 Ram moved forward in forest ( 22 / 4310) 52 


IV 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


Srimate Ramanujaya namah 


Ayodhyaa kaand 


(119 sarg) 


2-1 Dasarath invited elite (50 / 50) 

Bharat and Shatrughn were conspicuous by their absence in Ayodhya. Although they 
were enjoying the warmth of stay at his maternal uncle’s place (Kekayadesh), 
sometimes they used to miss the elderly father, the king Dasarath. While reflecting upon 
the four sons, the king also felt isolated for he thought Bharat and Shatrughn to be like 
mighty gods Indra and Varun, and there were away from home. His source of 
enjoyment used to whirl around the eldest son Ram, and the impression he carried 
about him is, “ He is impeccable, valorous and gem among the human beings . He is 
never found to be angry with any person he interacts. His words are always balanced 
and soft and he is never found to be provoked in any situation. His command on archery 
and scriptural knowledge is fully acknowledged by everyone." Musing thus he believed, 
“Ram is self created incarnation of the almighty Vishnu (2-1-6 17)." 

Note: At this stage the sage Valmiki fully reveals that Ram is no other than almighty Himself, and 

this is evident from the two referred sholk of this sarct extracted here below. The common notion 

that Valmiki never portrayed Ram as almighty appears to be baseless if one takes a look at these 

shlok as there could be no more direct expression than this that almighty Himself incarnated as 

Ram. 





Tf ^ I 


RTOcTT R^f R^: SRTcR: II 


Dasarath thought, “If he could see sooner the mantle of the statehood over Ram’s head 
he would feel very much satisfied in the evening of his life.” He felt so much excited in 
transforming his will into reality that he sent forth the invitation to elites of his kingdom, 
his well wishers and relatives to seek their consensus on this issue. While doing this he 
couldn’t invite the king of Kekaya and Mithila taking them to be for granted gracing the 
forthcoming coronation function. 

2-2 Ram to be successor prince (54 / 104) 

The invitees gathered in the assemble court in presence of Dasarath. The king 
addressed them, “ I have been carrying the kingly mantle of the house of Ikshavaku for a 
long time. Having been gripped by old age, I seek retirement now and wish to make 
Ram as my successor. I seek your consent in this regard.” The consent was unanimous 
and unequivocal as several of them expressed their views, “Ram is full of righteousness, 
morality and valorous courage. He is knowledgeable and commands the respect of the 
citizens by virtue of his rare qualities to respect everyone. His performances are well 
known to all of us. He is like the supreme among gods." 


Page 1 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-3 Direction for coronation arrangements (49 / 153) 

The king honoured the consent of the elite gathering with folded hands. The winsome 
and happy king submitted to Vashishath, Vamdev and other Brahmins, “ This month 
Chaitra is known for its auspiciousness as blooming flowers keep the forest and earth 
beautiful with colorful buddies. Let the coronation arrangements be made henceforth.” 
The king’s announcement received welcome applause of the assembly. Vashishath 
immediately directed the courtiers and officers, “All arrangements be made to collect 
ample gold, gem, rice, ghee, honey, flowers, herbs, sacred water, garlands, white fans, 
umbrellas, hundreds of golden pitchers, auspicious elephant, bull having decorated 
horns, full tiger skin. Full four contingents of army be brought ready near the ygyashala 
(oblation square) by the dawn time. The city squares be decorated with scented flowers, 
royal routes be kept moist and scented. The royal place as well as all thresholds of city’s 
dwellings be anointed with sandal paste and attractive decorations of flags, flowers and 
auspicious plants. Appropriate materials in ample amount viz/, rice, milk, honey, curd 
etc. be collected at squares where Brahmins will perform religious invocations ( swasthi 
vachan ) for the general well being. The first line of the royal premises be occupied with 
valorous well equipped warriors. The musicians and performers be placed in the second 
premises lines.” Vashishath and Vamdev after commanding the arrangements to be 
made intimated the king accordingly. 

On the direction of the king Dasarath, Sumantr brought Ram in chariot. As Ram arrived 
and stepped up to the king, the gathering from various regions of the kingdom: east, 
west, south, north, maleccha, hills and forests, everyone present got the rare opportunity 
to enjoy the pleasure of the occasion. Rare aura of handsomeness around Ram 
immersed all the attentions. When Ram offered his salutation to the king’s feet and 
honoured the assembly’s ovation, he got a seat. Dasarath spoke to him, “You are elder 
son from my eldest queen Kausalya. In the pushya nakshatra (moon in conjunction with 
pushya asterism) your coronation as successor prince has been scheduled. You yourself 
possess all the qualities of gem of a human being. You are polite and reciprocate well 
with others. Still as a friendly advice you keep them up with still further politeness. By all 
means direct or indirect you need to keep your ministers and all others happy and well 
satisfied. As the celestial beings become happy by ambrosia, you need to keep your 
sate happy with coffers full and granaries brimming to the top." 

In the meanwhile the news of coronation of Ram reached Kausalya and she became 
very liberal with the precious gifts to the visitors. Dasarath announced the dispersal and 
Ram offering salutation to the king went back on chariot. The citizens also moved to 
their place and offered respectful offerings to their favorite deities for the forthcoming 
auspicious event. 

2-4 Ram at his mother Kausalya’s palace (45 / 198) 

Dasarath entered his inner palace and advised Sumantr to bring Ram again to him. 
Sumantr immediately obeyed the command and Ram came prostrating to the king. 
Dasarath embracing Ram spoke to him, “I have lived long and have fulfilled all my 
wishes to my satisfaction. By offering oblations and performing ygya I have met my 
duties to the gods ( deva rina - divine obligations). Studying veda and religious scriptures 
I could attend to responsibilities due to the sages ( rishi rina, saintly obligations). By 
begetting sons like you I have met the pitru rina (ancestral obligations). Now my only 
duty left is to coronate you as a successor prince. For quite some time I could 


Page 2 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


experience bad omens, and dreams of comets striking the earth. Astrologers have 
indicated that rahu, surya (sun), and mangal (mars) are approaching my natal nakshatra 
(asterism) which may portend loss of life. Persons passion change, and therefore I have 
decided that as on today the moon is passing through punarvasu, and tomorrow in 
pushya your coronation shall be performed. I know Bharat is not present, and I trust his 
affection and honour to you. But I don’t want to delay as things keep on changing. From 
this moment until tomorrow’s coronation you with Sita need to maintain fast and sleep on 
the grass mat.” Hearing his command Ram offered his salutation and came back to his 
palace and moved further to the palace of his mother Kausalya. 

When he reached there, he found her in deep meditation sitting near the deity, lord 
Vishnu. Sumitra and Lakshaman getting the news had gathered at Kausalya’s place 
earlier before Sita could reach there. Although Kausalya was in meditation, Ram getting 
nearer to her broke the news and father’s command. She opened her joyous and tearful 
eyes and responded by invoking god’s blessing on him. 

Ram, addressed Lakshaman, “For you I am accepting the rulership of earth being 
entrusted by father.” Speaking thus with affection to him he came back to his palace. 

2-5 Vashishath initiated Ram to resolve for fast (26 /224) 

On the request of Dasarath, family priest Vashishath arrived at Ram’s palace riding a 
chariot. Ram himself received the priest and assisted him in getting down the chariot. 
When settled in his palace, the priest initiated by reciting the appropriate mantra of the 
religious ritual for Ram with Sita to resolve to keep fast on the eve of ensuing coronation. 
When the ritual was completed, Ram honoured the priest and thereafter soon he left his 
palace. By this time, bee line of friends and well wishers had begun thronging the Ram’s 
palace congratulating him to become the successor prince tomorrow. Meandering 
through the crowd Vashishath came back to the king and informed him about the 
completion of the ritual of resolve by Ram and Sita. Happily, Dasarath paying due 
respect to Vashishath, took his leave and entered inner palace where preparations for 
tomorrow’s function had fast picked up. 


2-6 Festivity until dawn (26 / 250) 

Ram engaged himself in worshipping and meditating Narayan. He offered ghee, atop the 
burning flames, as oblation in fire in the name of Narayan. Upon completion of oblation 
he took the balance ghee. He slept on a grass ( kush ) and was awake well in time so 
that he was ready about three hours before the sunrise completing his morning sandhya 
and worship. All over Ayodhya the vedic recitation created a pleasing environment 
throughout the night. The squares and crossings had spots of gathering of people 
coming from all quarters of the country hearing about the ensuing morning coronation of 
Ram. They felt lucky to have a view of the forthcoming ceremony. The streets and 
squares were decorated with light trees (2-6-18) as if night had no place in Ayodhya and 
a warm welcome awaited the auspicious dawn. 


II 


Page 3 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-7 Manthra’s move (36 / 286) 

Manthra had been a maid since Kaikeyi’s birth and continued doing so after she was 
married to Dasarath and shifted to Ayodhya from Kaikeydesh. That night, by 
coincidence, Manthra came out to roof top and was surprised to see the decorations of 
the city and spotted Kausalya distributing gifts to the visitors. She learnt from the 
neighbor’s maid that celebration was in the coming morning when Ram would be 
crowned as a successor prince to the king. She was shocked and instantly rushed down 
to Kaikeyi who was relaxing on her bed. She burst upon Kaikeyi, “O ill lucked woman! 
How do you sleep so unaware of the impending calamity to you and your lineage ? 
Coming morning Ram is going to be crowned as a prince. The king is so cunning that 
after sending Bharat out he hastily hatched a plan to crown Ram." Hearing the good 
news of Ram being crowned as prince, Kaikeyi got up joyously and immediately gave a 
precious gift to her saying, “Ram and Bharat are same and she doesn’t discriminate 
between the two. There can’t be better news than this." 

2-8 Cunning kubja (39 / 325) 

Manthra had a hunchback and so she was called kubja also. She returned back the 
jewel given to her in gift and spoke with great remorse, “You have lost your sense of 
discrimination who is well wisher and who is your enemy. You will serve as maid to 
Kausalya, and your daughter in law would stand folded hands to Ram’s wife. This is the 
only chance to claim the crown otherwise your claim to be closer to the king would prove 
false. Lakshaman and Shatrughn are younger in consideration of Bharat so their claim 
would never arise, but Bharat’s claim must be placed to the king. ” 

Hearing her plea Kaikeyi pleaded, “ Ram is a leaned person, great warrior, polite and 
well behaved, and therefore his coronation is fully justified. He deserves the crown in all 
respects as the citizens, elders and parents all trust his worthiness. Bharat enjoys full 
affection of Ram, and I believe in one hundred years Ram on his own would make him 
the ruler. Where is the question of Bharat being kept away to become the controller of 
the reign.” 

Kubja rejecting her pleas again spoke, “ You need to understand its future implication 
also. By this coronation, not only Bharat but his sons would also be debarred from the 
royal crown. The son of the king will have claim and not the others. You had your known 
rivalry with Kausalya, and she will teach you lesson once her son comes in command. 
Ram is closer to Lakshaman, and so is Lakshaman to Ram. Both would protect each 
other. In this process they would prefer to eliminate Bharat. From childhood Bharat had 
spent more time with maternal uncle and therefore he had lesser opportunity to impress 
the king and the result is obvious today that he has been discarded for the crown. Now, I 
propose, that after tomorrow Bharat should better go to forest instead of coming back to 
Ayodhya, otherwise he may be eliminated by Ram. O, Kaikeyi, I once again caution you 
to make all efforts to claim crown for Bharat and send his obstacle Ram to exile." 

2-9 Kaikeyi in catch (66 / 391) 

Hearing the words of Kaikeyi, Kubja became very angry and taking a deep breath in 
anger, she spoke, “I shall now send Ram to exile and crown Bharat as the prince.” 
Hearing her assertive words Kaikeyi wondered as to how she would achieve that. Kubja 
peeping into the wavering mind of Kaikeyi reminded her, “There was a fierce battle in the 


Page 4 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


city of Vaijayant, lying in the forest area of Dandka, between demons and gods; the king 
Dasarath was fighting from gods’ side. The demon, Timidhwaj also called Shambra had 
grievously injured Dasarath. During that period you were accompanying the king in the 
battle field and you saved the life of the king twice against the demons afflictions. The 
king, later unconditionally offered you to seek any two rewards of your choice, and 
respecting the king’s affections you deferred that for the future. O, Kaikeyi, here is the 
time for the realization of those two boons." 

Thus Kubja advised Kaikeyi to seek, “ Send Ram to exile for fourteen years, and crown 
Bharat as the prince.” Her plea was that by keeping Ram in exile for fourteen years, 
Bharat would get enough time to get his strong foothold in Ayodhya and also befriend 
the citizens in his favour. To realize the boons she advised her to enter the anger-house 
(, kopa bhawan ) in soiled cloths discarding all the jewels. She added, “When king comes, 
never look to his face, keep weeping. He loves you so much that to please you he would 
even risk to jump into fire. Don’t accept any barter with any amount of precious gifts, 
except realizing two boons of exile to Ram for fourteen years and crown to Bharat.” 

Kaikeyi was amazed to hear the Kubja’s machinations and applauding her talent, and 
muscular physique ( she was beautiful except the hunchback), promised to bejewel her foot 
to head once she realized her boons from the king. Prompted by Kubja, she entered the 
anger house with a wrathful face having soiled cloths on her body. 

2-10 King with Kaikeyi (40 / 431) 

After lying down on the dirty floor of the anger house, she discarded all her jewels 
littering them here and there on the floor. In the meanwhile, after the king felt the 
satisfaction of arrangements being made for the coming occasion, he entered his inner 
palace. He moved straight to Kaikeyi’s palace which was amidst a beautiful open garden 
having all sorts of flower, fruit bearing trees, lovely sit out places full with the provision of 
all sorts of drinks. The pet birds were chirping songs. He wanted to give a surprise to the 
queen by breaking the good news as if she was unaware of the coronation ceremony. 
To his surprise, he couldn’t see the queen on her usual couch. The lady on the door 
intimated the confinement of the queen in the anger house. He paced inside and found 
her lying on the floor. Touching her body he enquired as to why she was there. He 
continued, “Who has caused this state to you ? Tell me, I would take immediate action. 
You know the globe from east to west, and south to north encompassing Sindhu, 
Sauveer, Saurastra, Vang, Ang, Magadh, Matsya, Kashi, Kosal and others are under my 
reign. I promise what you wish, I can make a poor full of riches, and can devoid an 
unruly rich to the state of a pauper." 

2-11 Kaikeyi claimed boons (29 / 460) 

Hearing his tall promises, the queen Kaikeyi broke her silence mentioning nobody had 
caused any insult to her. She asked the king to be firm then only she would place her 
demands. The king swore by the name of Ram saying, “You know I can sacrifice 
everything for you, and Ram being the dearest person to me, I firmly swear by his name 
to deliver your demand.” Kaikeyi continued, “ Let the fire, sun, moon, stars, invisible 
celestials, family ‘s deity all be witness to what king has promised to deliver.” When the 
king reiterated to uphold what he said, she revealed her claims, “O, King! Kindly recall 
the scene of the battlefield between demons and gods, where you were fighting on gods 
side and had been seriously injured by Shamabr. Getting pleased with my service in 


Page 5 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


saving your life, I was promised two boons. Now I claim those two boons, “First, the 
arrangements being made for coronation tomorrow should be utilized for crowning 
Bharat and not Ram. Second, Ram shall be exiled to forest in the garb of an ascetic for 
fourteen years. If both of my boons are not met, I would better die than to witness 
tomorrow’s coronation of Ram.” 

2-12 Dasarath in dilemma (114 / 574) 

The demands were so harsh and cunningly designed that king got a severe shock and 
became unconscious. When he gained his senses, he uttered, “ O, cruel one, you are 
bent upon to destroy the family. I got a snake in the guise of my wife. What harm Ram 
had caused to you ! There is on one who dislikes Ram. The earth can sustain without 
sun, crops can live without water but I can’t bear his separation. It is you who have been 
praising Ram, even better than Bharat, and now today it is utterly unbelievable, seeing 
you turning around against him. I pray with my folded hands, I even touch your feet that 
don’t have ill will against Ram.” 

Kaikeyi reproached the king, “Why do you claim to love me, when you can’t uphold your 
words. Recall the incident of Shibi who offered his flesh to save a pigeon. Another is 
example of Alark, who offered his eyes to the blind Brahmins. You are at your royal 
liberty to take back your words. I won’t survive for a moment if my boons are turned 
down. I would not take the deadly poison before your eyes.” 

The king couldn’t believe her words, and fell like a dead log. After sometime when he 
regained his consciousness he tried to bring her around by recounting, “I fail to imagine 
how Bharat will accept this coronation by sending Ram to exile. He would never do that. 
What the world would have an impression about me, that in the trap of the lust of a 
woman I spoiled my family. What answer, shall I give to Kausalya and Sumitra when 
they would call upon me. How shall I bear the pangs of Sita whose husband shall be in 
exile? I firmly believe that Ram would never hesitate to go to forest once he hears about 
this. Well, it seems now my end is imminent. Turning widow you would enjoy this state 
with your son. If Bharat accepts crown sending Ram to exile let him be debarred from 
performing my last rites (2-12-93).” 

The king continued speaking aloud, “How cruel are women! But what I mean applies to 
mother of Bharat only and not to other women. My Ram who had been served royal food 
prepared by expert cook, how would he eat the bitter wild food! How can I bear the 
scene of seeing Ram in an ascetics ochre ! Let there be myriads of faults in the earth in 
which you may disappear, but I won’t honour your words. I try again, I pray you to 
withdraw your lethal demand.” 

2-13 Lamenting king (26 / 600) 

All pleas of Dasarath fell on the deaf ear of the queen Kaikeyi and she retorted, “Why do 
you boast of your truthfulness? I would never withdraw my claim.” Angry king spoke to 
her, “Cruel and sinner woman! Sending Ram to exile you want to see me dying. What 
shall I answer in heaven when they ask me about Ram? Better I die now, which could at 
least save me from earning bad name of sending Ram to exile. After so much of efforts 
on old age, I got blessed with sons, what a pity to my fate! “ 

While king continued lamenting, the day ended (2-13-15) with the advent of 


Page 6 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


sun set. King wished various options to help him out, “I pray, there should never be 
dawn, so that Ram is not sent to forest at all. Let there be instant dawn now to avoid 
seeing Kaikeyi’s face any more.” Wailing and crying he passed through several periods 
of unconsciousness. When conscious he began praising Kaikeyi, “Well natured, good 
hearted lady! you will never send Ram to exile. Save him, he had been dearer to you 
than Bharat." 

Seeing her unrelenting with repeat of harsh words again, he fell on the floor in swoon. 
The night was coming to its end with indications of coming of dawn while bards and 
singers commenced waking up welcome note for the king. 

2-14 Knotty Kaikeyi (68 / 668) 

Seeing the king on floor she addressed him, “You are silent as if you are not aware of 
my claims. Be truthful to your words, and grant my prayer, otherwise say that I am not 
your wife and I would end my life before your eyes. I again repeat my claims three 
times." Hearing her, the king remorsefully spoke, “It is now almost morning, and 
auspicious materials for the coronation of Ram have arrived. Elders would be waiting for 
me. If you still obstruct his coronation, I disown my pledge to wedding fire (2-14-14) of 
continuing with you as wife. I disown you, and your son together. After my death, 
legitimate tribute of water offered by Ram would only be acceptable to me.” 

Kaikeyi interrupted angrily and asked the king to call Ram. The king caught in awkward 
situation also expressed his wish to see his eldest son, Ram. 

With the break of the dawn, Vashishath and other priests entered the royal area of the 
city to commence the coronation in time. Seeing Sumantr, Vashishath advised him to 
inform the king of his arrival and also readiness of all the auspicious materials, “water 
from the ganga and sea, udumbra wood, seeds of grains, fragrances, gems and jewels, 
laja (paddy’s pop corn), honey (sharkara), curd, ghee, grass, flower, milk, eight virgin 
girls, elephant with flowing natural fluid from its head, chariot with four horses, special 
sword, bow, palanquin with carriers, brilliant white royal umbrella, chawar (for fanning), 
water pot of gold, bull with sizeable hump, lion with four canine teeth, simhasan (throne 
flanked by lions’ statue), tiger skin, fire with sacred timber samidha (ignitor), musical 
instruments, women singers, dancers, brahmins (priests), acharya (teachers), 
auspicious birds and deer.” He advised him to inform that elite citizens have gathered 
with their followers to welcome and celebrate the coronation ceremony. 

Sumantr came to the inner palace and because of his status went straight to the king, 
without facing any formal interference from the door keepers. With folded hands he 
submitted mildly to the king, “The holy night has passed out with the break of the dawn. 
Allow me to inform you about the preparedness already made and if anything is balance 
direct me to do that. Vashishath with priests have arrived and all ceremonial materials 
are at hand. Elite and excited citizen have arrived.” 

The words of Sumantr were although very soothing to the king’s ears, while lying on the 
floor, remorsefully he opened his red eyes and advised Sumantr not to hurt him further. 
Hearing this, Sumantr, in awe, back tracked a few steps away from the king. Kaikeyi 
came forward and spoke to Sumantr, “The king couldn’t sleep and whole night was 
concerned about the coronation. His wish is to bring Ram immediately here.” 

Sumantr paced fast steering through the crowed collected for the ceremony towards 
Ram’s palace. 


Page 7 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-15 Ceremonial scene (49 / 717) 

On way he had a visual delight of preparedness. People from all walks of life have 
gathered. The occurrence of auspicious period of pushya nakshatra and kark lagna 
(natal zodiac sign of Ram) have been marked with the rising sun (2-15-4). 

Kings from various territories who wanted to convey their arrival to Dasarath spoke to 
passing Sumantr, “The auspicious moments have arrived. We have helped in making all 
necessary preparations for the ceremony. The king Dasarath should have been here, 
but why we don’t see him yet.” Sumantr informed them, “The king is awake and with his 
order I am going to bring Ram to him. However, I would convey your message to the 
king.” 

Saying thus he came back to the inner royal palace which always had barred entry. 
Getting on the threshold of the king’s chamber, he submitted with due respect to 
Dasarath the message of invited kings waiting for him outside. Dasarath painfully spoke 
to Sumantr, “Why did you come back without Ram ? Kaikeyi had also asked you to do 
that. I am awake and go and bring Ram soon here." 

Sumantr riding his chariot immediately rushed to the Ram’s palace and could see on 
way side the waves of crowd and celebrities gathered for the coronation ceremony. 
From all quarters the sound of pleasing vedic recitations had permeated the scene. The 
avenues were decorated with colorful festoons and banners. Thus enjoying the extent of 
preparedness he entered Ram’s palace which was fully decorated for the special 
occasion. All around varieties of birds were chirping atop the green trees beautifying the 
inner court of the palace. Inside the attendants were fully alert. Maids including several 
hunchback among them were found attending inside the inner palace. 

(Note: 2 - 15-40 suggests that engagement of several hunchback maids were customary inside the palace. 
Similar reference has been found in sarg - 9, when Kaikeyi got impressed with the plot suggested by 
Manthra (also called kubja due to her hunchback), and she expressed her wishes that Manthra would 
receive the respect of all the hunchback maids 2 - 9 - 52 .) 

2-16 Ram on call to Dasarath (47 / 764) 

Sumantr was greeted by the guards at Ram’s palace. On Sumantr’s request intimation 
was sent to Ram about his arrival to see him. When Ram learnt about his arrival he 
asked the guard to bring him inside. When Sumantr entered inside, he saw Ram on a 
golden couch and on his side Sita was present as if moon was accompanied by chitra 
nakshatra (2-16-10). 

(Note: 

chitra has been mentioned (2-16-10) with a special intention here, and it needs some astrological 
study. Normally moon with rohini is quoted because of brishabha rashi being the sign of exalted 
house for moon and rohini pertains to brishabha sign. 

Another quotation in 2-16-9 is of comparing the fragrance used by Ram with that of the fragrance 
of boar’s blood as translated by several publishers, but this is not proper. This is strange, and 
needs etymological review as well as consideration of physical context where it has been used. 
Simple word meaning causes harm to the established cultural and religious ethics. In fact this word 
means the fragrance of red rose. ) 

When salutation by Sumantr and greeting by Ram was over, Sumantr intimated Ram, “ 
The king wants to see you immediately in the palace of Kaikeyi.” Ram taking leave from 
Sita immediately moved to Kaikeyi’s palace riding his chariot whereupon Lakshaman 


Page 8 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


was present in the rear part holding the umbrella over Ram’s head. On way Ram 
answered warmly the people’s ovations. Multitude of horses, chariots, elephants carrying 
the invitees followed Ram’s chariot on way. 

2-17 Ram passed through crowd (22 / 786) 

His chariot passed through the royal avenue full of banners and flags hoisting atop the 
buildings. The jubilant crowd welcoming him cleared the way for smooth passage of his 
chariot. He saw several junctions duly decorated with customary auspicious materials 
curd, colored rice, green leaves etc., and scented with fragrant incenses. Leaving the 
royal avenue he passed through three enclosures of the royal premises riding the 
chariot. All the enclosures had barred entry protected with bow men and soldiers. The 
last two enclosures before entering the Kaikeyi’s palace he had to move on foot. 

2-18 Kaikeyi acquainted Ram with her claims (41 / 827) 

When he entered her chamber he saw the king on a couch flanked by Kaikeyi but the 
father’s face was pale and sorrowful. He saluted his feet and then the feet of Kaikeyi. 
Seeing him Dasarath exclaimed with deep sight, “ Ram I.” He couldn’t speak further any 
more and was immersed in deep agony. Looking to him Ram thought, “What mistake I 
have committed that the father doesn’t look to me nor speak to me. It is quite unusual, 
and never before I had experience such treatment from the father.” He spoke out, “ O, 
Father, What wrong have I committed which made you apathetic towards me.” When he 
found his all pleas to father not being responded, he looked to Kaikeyi and praying her 
asked, “What wrong have I committed that enraged my father to this extent ? 

Kaikeyi interrupted, “Ram, king is not angry with you, nor have you committed any 
wrong. The king like an ordinary man doesn’t want to stick to his words, and therefore he 
is not coming out before you.” When Ram requested to elaborate, she repeated the story 
of her protecting the king in the past in the battle of demons and gods, and in turn 
earning two boons to her. She continued, “I had deferred those boons for the future, and 
now I claim them: first, coronation to Bharat and not to you, and second, fourteen years 
exile to you in Dandak from today itself in the dress of an ascetic with braided hair.” She 
exhorted Ram, “ Help to realize my claims, and liberate him from the sin of not keeping 
up his words.” 

2-19 Ram honoured the claims ( 40 / 867) 

Ram assured Kaikeyi, “I would immediately move to the forest, but why the king doesn’t 
speak to me as earlier. I also advise sending for Bharat immediately by dispatching fast 
footed horses to his maternal uncle’s place. For Bharat I would sacrifice everything and I 
would be proud of Bharat becoming the prince.” He continued with Kaikeyi, “For Bharat’s 
coronation you need not have asked the king, rather you would have commanded me. 
But it seems you won’t trust me, therefore you didn’t ask me to step aside for Bharat.” 

Kaikeyi was glad to hear Ram’s assurances and asked him time and again to quickly 
move to the forest. She also mentioned, “The absence of king’s words to you reflects his 
deep affection to you and he doesn’t want to pronounce exile to you.” The king Dasarath 
hearing the discourses sighed deeply, “what a calamity I” and fell in swoon. Ram held 
him up to bring back his consciousness. Kaikeyi spoke to Ram, “Until you leave for the 
forest, the king will neither take bath nor eat anything, therefore you need to be quick.” 


Page 9 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


Ram mentioned, “ On way to forest right from here I would surely visit my mother and 
console Sita.” Saying thus, he circumambulated the king and Kaikeyi and offering his 
salutations to them, he moved out of the palace followed by angry and silence swollen 
Lakshaman. His calm remained totally composed emitting his divine smile. He met on 
way his well wishers and kept passing with smile. He deserted chariot, umbrella and 
other formalities. On way he circumambulated the auspicious materials collected for the 
ceremony and offered his respect to them. Moving further he entered his mother’s 
palace where pleasure of the ceremony to be performed was on its peak. 

2-20 Kausalya shocked ( 55 / 922) 

When Ram left the palace of Kaikeyi, women (invitee consorts of the other kings) inside 
began wailing and crying against Ram being exiled. They cried loudly, “Even if the king 
himself didn’t ask Ram to go to Danadak, he responded with responsibility of an able 
son, and having quit the claim for the throne in favour of Bharat proceeding to forest.” By 
this time Ram entered the palace of his mother where he paid respects to waiting elder 
Brahmins and others in the outer three enclosures. Arriving in the innermost enclosure of 
his mother’s palace, he could see her performing worship to lord Vishnu as she was 
doing sacrificial oblations to the fire. Seeing Ram coming she moved forward and 
greeted him. When Ram touched her feet, she took him up and embracing close her 
chest she smelt his head. She took Ram close to her place of worship and offered a 
seat. Ram while taking the seat broke the news, “Mother, Bharat would now be crowned, 
and I am moving to Dandak as an ascetic staying on roots and fruits for fourteen years. I 
came to seek your permission.” 

No sooner she heard these words than she fell on the ground in swoon. Ram lifted her 
back to consciousness. She began crying, “Throughout my palace life, I have sustained 
the bitterness of Kaikeyi. Now when I was to enjoy the fruit of being mother of an elder 
son, I have been rejected by the king. It would have been much better to remain barren 
and my sorrow would have been limited to not having a son. This torture is really 
unbearable. But what can I do, the death also doesn’t visit me. I have waited for 
seventeen years (2-20-45) after your investiture ceremony of the sacred thread only to 
hear this news of sending you to forest. When Bharat would come in command, I 
understand well, no one would enquire my welfare. I would also follow you and remain 
with you in Dandak.” 

2-21 Efforts of Ram to pacify Lakshaman and console Kausalya (63 / 985) 

Hearing queen Kausalya lamenting, Lakshman broke his silence, “O, mother, I also 
don’t agree what Ram is doing. The old man has lost his orientation, and under passion 
for a woman he has banished his ablest son.” 

Turning to Ram he said, “When I am by your side, you need not worry about any sort of 
resistance. Before others come to know about the development, let us seize the 
kingdom by force. Entire Ayodhya from the side of Bharat shall be annihilated alone by 
me and we would retain the prosperous kingdom with us. If your father, doesn’t behave 
due to a woman, I shall not only imprison him but would eliminate him forever. What 
reason or strength he has got to snatch the kingdom from you.” 

Again addressing Kausalya he assured her, “If Ram goes to forest or risks his life in fire, 
I shall do that before he comes into action.” Lamenting and weeping Kausalya, picking 
up from Lakshaman spoke to Ram, “Listen what Lakshaman is saying, and act 
immediately. Don’t leave me alone lamenting. Kasypa had ascended to heaven only 


Page 10 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


because of his service to mother. If you respect your father, I am also your mother and 
you need to honour my words and take care of me. I would keep fast unto death and that 
would make you responsible like ocean had to face when it ignored the penance of a 
Brahmin.” 

Ram submitted to his mother, “ I am bound to obey the command of father and without 
violating that I have to go to forest. We are all aware about the sage Kandu who killed a 
cow at the instance of his father. Even in our own dynasty, to honour father’s command, 
sixty thousand sons of Sagar sacrificed their lives. Example of killing by Prashuram of 
his mother Renuka due to father Jamdagni’s command is universally known. Hence I 
seek your humble permission to allow me to follow his command. It is because of his 
words to Kaikeyi, she asked me to go to forest.” 

Turning towards Lakshaman, Ram pacified him, “I understand your affection to me and I 
am familiar with your proven valour. It is not proper to show discourtesy to our father. We 
need to establish righteousness because ultimate triumph goes in favour of righteous 
persons. 

Turning to Kausalya and bowing low, he sought her permission swearing her especially 
in the name of his own life. She didn’t heed to his swearing and rising again with 
extraordinary strength, reminded him of his duty to his mother also. Ram tried to bring 
her around and reminded that including her it was the responsibility of Sita, Lakshaman 
and Sumitra to honour the words of the king. 

Ram continued, “Lakshaman, you favour mother, ignoring my untold misery of violating 
the father’s words. It is duty of mother Kausalya not to leave Ayodhya so long as her 
venerable husband is alive.” 

Ram had a firm resolve to honour father’s words and making a circumambulatory 
salutation to mother Kausalya, again sought her blessings to allow him to move to forest. 

2-22 Destiny prevailed (30 / 1015) 

Coming closer to Lakshaman, Ram tried to bring him around whose red eyes were 
shining with anger. He advised him for immediate stopping of the continuing 
preparations of the ceremony. Further he analyzed the development of the events which 
could happen as predetermined by the destiny. Continuing further he mentioned, 
“Kaikeyi’s sudden interference is only because of destiny. She is not at fault at all. 
Because it is the demand of the destiny, please stop the ensuing function immediately. 
To keep Kaikeyi cool and assured I want to immediately proceed to forest. This will 
enhance the honour of our venerable father also.” 

2-23 Lakshaman rejected destiny (41 / 1056) 

Lakshaman was still simmering with anger and his facial expressions indicated his 
disagreement with Ram. He couldn’t restrain and spoke, “I don’t take this as simple. 
Both Dasarath and Kaikeyi had a long term plan for this, otherwise why the boons were 
deferred so long. As regards destiny, I have potential to change it. I advise you to take 
your position for the coronation, and I would see if anything comes on way including all 
the forces of the assembled kings. The bow, arrow, and sword are not decorative pieces, 

I know their function well.” Listening Lakshaman boiling to the brim, Ram tried to 


Page 11 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


compose him and reminded him, “I know only righteous path is that to honour the words 
of father. " 

2-24 Kausalya relented (38 / 1094) 

Kausalya could see the firm resolve of Ram to proceed to forest. She tried to impress 
Ram to take her along in the forest. Ram didn’t agree to her proposal and submitted very 
politely, “ Mother, so long as the king is alive he is the commander of all of us. How can I 
take you with me ? If a woman doesn’t worship nor offer any flower nor take up fire 
oblation in the name of any gods, but is steadfast in her service and respect to her 
husband she is considered pious and sacred and enjoys the respect of all others 
including gods.” 

Ram’s words enlightened her, and she agreed for his departure and wished to see him 
back safe so that she would be able to rejoice his return after the specified period. 

2-25 Kausalya invoked blessings (47 / 1141) 

Ram was determined to go to forest, and mother Kausalya shunning her grief outwardly 
commenced performing religious rites to invoke blessings on him. She sipped water 
from her palm and purified herself before taking up the rites. On doing necessary 
oblations in fire, she expressed her wishes, “Ram, depart now, follow the righteousness, 
and comeback safely. The righteousness shall be your protector shield. Your strong 
discipline in observing full respect to father and mother would keep you in safe situation. 
The sages, temples and foresters on your way shall provide you protection. The arms 
offered by Vishwamitra shall protect you. The animals, rivers, trees, plants, bushes, 
creatures of forest may protect you. May celestials sadhya, visvadev, pusha, bhag, and 
aryama keep you safe. The supreme god and creator (Brahma) be kind on you. The in- 
charge of hours, days, fortnights, seasons, weather, and varsha (year) protect you. The 
gods Skand, Som (moon), Brihaspati, and sage chief Narad guide you safely." 

She continued her invoking of auspicious protection from Shiv, Surya (sun), Varun (sea 
god), Indr, Vayu (wind), and Yam. She didn’t forget to seek protection from demons, 
serpents, and other deadly dangers. The natural geo-mass of forests, sea, hills and 
mountains were invoked to protect Ram. 

She invited the venerable priests and Brahmins to perform fire oblation to wish and 
bless Ram in his safe journey to forest and timely return to Ayodhya. They blessed Ram 
by reciting the auspicious texts followed by showering auspicious materials rice, flower, 
mustard and sacred water over him. She offered precious gifts to all priests and 
Brahmins. She was not satisfied and continued to invoke, “Similar safety which Vinita 
had wished to her son Garuda while he was to carry nectar; Aditi had blessed Indr 
before facing Vritrasur.” 

“The greatness of Lord Trivikram while he measured the universe, be upon you” , She 
mentioned specifically. Though, from inside she was in deep agony, but maintained 
smiling countenance and to shield him with her personal protective wishes, she went 
around him clockwise. She embraced him closely and showered all her good wishes 
lowering his head to his nostril to take a deep smell of his head. While leaving Ram took 
hold of her sacred feet to seek her blessings and moved towards Sita’s palace. 


Page 12 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-26 Ram reached Sita (38 / 1179) 

Leaving mother’s palace and passing through waiting crowd Ram having head low 
entered his palace. Sita was waiting for his arrival on completing her personal religious 
offering to god. When she saw him coming she went forward to welcome him but 
anxiety soon gripped her when she found his face a little sad. She enquired, “I see you 
a little perturbed. You are not endowed with the ritual decorations of honey and curd 
over your head. White umbrella with hundred ribs, white chowries, leading auspicious 
elephant do not accompanying you. I am afraid if everything is fine.” 

Breaking his silence Ram spoke to her, “The king has decided to send me to forest for 
fourteen years and instead crown Bharat as prince. This has happened because of long 
pending boons to Kaikeyi which the king is obliged to fulfill.” 

He continued, “I am on way to forest and dropped in here to see you only. Remaining 
here, you would continue your offer and worship to god without break with due salutation 
to the king every day. Never try to applaud my qualities in front of Bharat as that might 
hurt the person in command of the kingdom. All the mothers had reared me up with 
affection, and remain compliant to them. Take particular care of Kausalya who is getting 
weak due to my departure to forest." 

2-27 Sita submitted to accompany Ram (23 / 1202) 

Sita got a little concerned when she learnt her to be in Ayodhya. With eloquence she 
submitted to Ram, “Wife is the fortune of husband, and therefore I need to be with you. 
Husband is everything father, mother, son, friends and what not for a wife. Being with 
you in forest, I would strive to remove the thorns away from your route. I would remain 
on wild roots and fruits and would always be happy in the realm of mountains, rivers, 
and all difficult terrain full of monkeys, wild animals, and dangerous creatures. In your 
separation even heaven is of no worth to me. With you in forest I would enjoy the life as 
if I were at my parents’ abode.” 

2-28 Ram counted forest constraints (26 / 1228) 

Ram hadn’t thought of taking Sita to forest. He began enlisting one after another the 
hardships encountered in forest life. He mentioned, “Routes are thorny. Terrain is tough. 
Rivers and mountains are full of dreadful creatures. Flying objects (mosquitoes, flies) are 
dangerous and harmful. Continued sustenance on fruits and roots is difficult to maintain. 
Monkeys and other dangerous animals roam about freely. It is not advisable to be with 
me in forest, and better you remain here with full righteousness. 

2-29 Sita firm for forest ( 24 / 1252) 

She discarded one after another the pleas given by Ram against forest life, “For a 
married woman the pleasure is to remain with husband, and sorrow is when she is 
separated. In your presence I don’t see any dreadful scene of the forest. I also recall the 
prediction of a Brahmin who reading the signs over me had foretold that I would be stay 
in forest. At one more occasion, a woman soothsayer, had foretold to my mother about 
my impending forest life. I see those things coming true now. If you don’t take me with 
you, I would end my life either in water, fire or take poison. Take me with you, and I 
would share all your pains and pleasure there together.” 


Page 13 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-30 Ram relented and Sita to accompany ( 47 / 1299) 

Sita was adamant and she further forcefully placed her claim to accompany the 
husband. She mentioned, “Why are you afraid of me in following you in the forest ? I am 
surprised whether in the physique of a man why do you demonstrate the weakness of a 
woman? My heaven is there where you are present. The thorns and sharp gravels on 
way would be like cotton cushion if I am with you. In your absence even one moment is 
sorrowful, and how shall I bear with the period of ten years plus three years plus one 
year (2-30-21) i.e. , 14 years altogether. In any case I am not going to stay alive in your 
absence; I would take poison and seek immediate death than to wait for someone else’s 
command.” Placing her claim firmly, she caught hold of Ram and began weeping. 

Note: Shlok 2-30-21 gives the breakup of 14 years = 10 yrs + 3 yrs + 1 yr. This indicates the category of 
upcoming events broadly characterizing the future in three distinguishable periods. It is said Ram stayed for 
about 10 yrs in Chitrakoot, 3 yrs in Dandkaranya, and last 1 yr was culmination of occurrence of most 
deciding events serving the purpose of advent of Ram to forest. 

Ram had to relent on her state and he spoke, “I know that you are adamant to be with 
me. Without knowing your views how could I have asked you to come to forest. Now it is 
clear your abode is in forest with me. Come, don’t worry, we will together live in the 
forest. 

But before you move, give generous gifts to Brahmins and the poor waiting here outside. 
As advised Sita immediately distributed the garments and valuables among the 
Brahmins and poor people. 

2-31 Adamant Lakshaman (35 / 1334) 

Lakshaman had entered Sita’s palace and had heard the conversation between Sita and 
Ram. When he saw Ram had agreed to take Sita to forest, he also moved forward to 
Ram and holding his feet in his hands prayed for permission for him to accompany them 
in forest. Ram didn’t agree to which Lakshaman enquired, “I was earlier permitted to 
accompany you, what has happened that now I am being debarred to go with you. Why, 
what is the reason ?.” 

Ram told him, “In our absence Kaikeyi the daughter of Aswapti (2-31-13), might be more 
strict to co-wives Kausalya and Sumitra, and Baharat would concentrate more on his 
mother Kaikeyi. They, therefore, need you.” Lakshaman didn’t agree and mentioned, 
“Mother Kausalya has thousand villages in her control and she can provide succor to 
several thousand persons like me. She would take care of Sumiatra as well. Don’t ask 
me to stay back. In forest I would find and arrange all convenient routes for you. 
Obtaining food, water, flower etc would be my responsibility.” 

Looking to his firm resolve, Ram asked to go and bid farewell to your friends. He also 
asked him, “In the ygay at Janakapur of king Janak, Varun the sea god, had personally 
offered mighty celestial bow, everlasting quiver full of arrows, two swords. These are 
lying at guru Vashishath’s place. Go and get them.” 

Lakshaman immediately brought those arms and on way he bade farewell to his friends 
as well. Ram again asked him, “I want to dispose jewelries and my other precious 
possession to learned and austere Brahmins. Invite Suyagy, the son of Vashishath and 
others.” 


Page 14 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-32 Ram gifted precious charity (44 / 1378) 

Lakshaman obeyed Ram and went to Suygya’s house of fire where he used to offer 
oblation. He spoke to Suyagy, “Friend, come and see Ram’s palace.” Suyagy 
immediately followed Lakshaman. Ram saw him coming and along with Sita went 
forward with folded hands to greet him who was well versed in veda. Together with Sita, 
as a mark of respect, he gave a clockwise round of Suyagy and worshipped him by 
offering varieties of precious jewelries. Sita offered special gifts for his wife. Ram offered 
him an elegant elephant, called Satrujaya which he had got from his maternal uncle, 
along with several more elephants. Suyagy with his wife showered blessing upon Ram 
and his wife. 

Ram indicated to Lakshaman, “See those two learned Brahmins, Agastya and Kaushika 
are there. Give them fabulous gifts of cows, gems and cloths.” He spotted another 
Brahmin and said, “See he is studying Taittriya (branch of Yajurved) and is a favorite of 
Kausalya. Give him as much wealth, garments and as many cows until he feels 
satisfied.” 

Ram then located Chitrarath, a friend and charioteer of his father, Dasarath, standing for 
long in the crowd. He asked Lakshaman to gift him generously as much he wanted. 

He also indicated towards some students in the crowd who were studying katha and 
kalaap and asked Lakshaman to honour them with fabulous gifts of their choice. 

He saw several Brahmin students standing near Kasuhlya, satisfy them with varieties of 
gifts to bring pleasure to mother Kausalya. 

Thus as directed Lakshaman offered gifts to Brahmins, poor and deprived as desired by 
Ram. 

Ram could see the domestic attendants with tearful eyes. He gifted them fabulously and 
asked them to look after his place as well as that of Lakshaman until he returned from 
exile. 

A Brahmin called Trijata used to carry axe, spade and plough and was doing digging of 
soil in forest. His wife had many children and they were afflicted by poverty. He was 
advised by his wife to go immediately to Ram’s palace and get some gifts. Trijata in loin 
cloth came to Ram crossing five enclosures of the palace and spoke to him, “I carry out 
soil digging in forest and I am poor.” Ram in good humor asked him, “Throw your staff 
and collect all the cows within boundary of the distance from here to the place where 
your staff drops down on ground.” Trijata threw the shaft with his utmost strength which 
fell on the other bank of Saryu. As offered by Ram, he gathered all the innumerable 
cows upto the bank of Saryu where his staff had fallen. Ram again asked him for 
something more he wanted and asked him not to mind playing humour with him. Trijata 
was satisfied and blessing Ram he went home with his wife. 

Ram gifted valuables to innumerable Brahmins and poor and no one remained there 
without receiving gifts. 

2-33 Ram moved to see Dasarath (on way to forest) (31 / 1409) 

Sita, Ram and Lakshaman moved out on the avenues on foot to see Dasarath on way to 
forest. Sita had tied the arms to her garland. People thronged the streets, and perched 


Page 15 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


over the building tops to have a look of royal trio. They were surprised over the 
development and proving Dasarath guilty of sending the ablest of men to forest. They 
expressed their wish to desert Ayodhya and stay with Ram in forest. Passing through 
them Ram arrived at the king’s palace where Sumantr was found outside. Ram 
requested Sumantr to inform king of his arrival. People were sad but Ram maintained 
unruffled calm and smiling face standing outside waiting for a call to see Dasarath. 

2-34 Ram met Dasarath ( 61 / 1470) 

Sumantr entered the king’s chamber with folded hands and addressing the king with 
respectful salutations submitted, “Ram with Sita and Lakshaman are waiting to see you. 
Ram has gifted his valuable possession to Brahmins and attendants. They are on way to 
forest and came to seek you blessings.” Dasarath, although grief stricken, asked 
Sumantr to call all his wives first and then bring Ram inside. Immediately Sumantr 
informed all the queens about the desire of the king to see them at Kaikeyi’s palace. 
They all arrived. Kausalya surrounded by three hundred fifty women (2-34-13) arrived 
slowly there. After their arrival, Ram with Sit and Lakshaman were taken in. 

When Dasarath saw them coming he rose from his couch and rushed to Ram, but before 
reaching he fainted and fell on the ground. While others were crying, Ram, Sita and 
Lakshaman gave their hands to raise him and bring back to his couch. When he 
regained his consciousness, Ram spoke, “We are here for your permission to forest. I 
forbade Sita and Lakshaman but they are adamant to stay with me in forest.” 

Dasarath intervened, “Ram, I was supefied by Kaikeyi. You don’t go to forest, rather put 
me to confinement and take control of the kingdom.” Ram didn’t agree to that and 
expressed his resolve to honor his words given to Kaikeyi, “This sovereign state is now 
set for Bharat to rule. I would come back after fourteen years and bless me to complete 
my resolve.” 

Dasarath praising his firmness to follow righteousness mentioned, “ Don’t leave today, 
stay for tonight and leave tomorrow morning.” Ram politely submitted not to do that 
because he had already assured Kaikeyi to leave immediately. Saying this when he 
moved to touch his feet, the king embraced him but soon he fell fainted without any 
movement in his body. Sumantr also fainted on the sideways. The queens except 
Kaikeyi began crying and lamenting loudly. 

2-35 Kaikeyi didn’t oblige Sumantr ( 37 / 1507) 

Sumantr couldn’t restrain and exhorted Kaikeyi to use her wisdom and save the family 
from being ruined. He mentioned, “The succession belongs to the eldest and she should 
withdraw her boons. Ram is ready to go to forest, and this materializes, we will follow 
him and Ayodhya is going to be desolated.” 

It is true that the nature and characteristics of a female child follow the nature of her 
mother, where as mail child follows the nature of father. In proof of this he narrated a 
story related to the mother of Kaikeyi, “Kaikeyi’s father had a boon from a sage to 
understand the talk of any creature including birds, animals etc. Once when he was in 
his bed room with his wife (Kaikeyi’s mother), he laughed hearing the discourse of ants. 
His wife asked the reason for his laughter. He said if I tell you I would have to lose my 
life. She was adamant at the cost of his life to know the reason for his laughter. He went 


Page 16 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


to the sage and sought his permission to divulge the talk of ants to his wife. The sage 
forbade him not to do that. He didn’t disclose that and remained happily.” This incident 
indicates Kaikeyi is also following the same tread of her mother ignoring the life of her 
husband. 

Despite his forceful exhortation to take back the boon Kaikeyi, didn’t budge and 
maintained her stand unchanged. 

2-36 Kaikeyi rejected transferring treasury and army (33 / 1540) 

Dasarath asked Sumantr, “Send all four category of army with Ram to forest. Make all 
arrangements in forest with treasury being transferred in the forest to assist Ram in 
staying conveniently in forest. The business houses be transferred to forest. Let there be 
available all facilities as available in Ayodhya.” 

Kaikeyi reacting to this mentioned, “The eldest son, Asamanj was exiled in forest by 
Sagar, and he had to live without any royal support. Why then Ram will receive the 
facilities in forest? Bharat will not accept the state devoid of royal army and treasury.” 

Hearing the quotation of Kaikeyi, one of the eldest and senior ministers of the king, 
Sidhartha interfered, “ Asamanj was notorious. He used to derive cruel enjoyment by 
throwing live children in Saryu to die by drowning. He was exiled on public complain to 
the king en masse. There is no comparison of the referred case with the present one. No 
one has any grievance against Ram. If Kaikeyi has got any grievance she should come 
out openly her grievance against him.” 

Picking up from Sidhartha’s pleading, Dasarath spoke to Kaikeyi, “O, Sinner, why don’t 
you heed to what Sidharth is saying. Now I declare to discard every wealth and comfort 
of this state and shall follow Ram in forest and you rule with Bharat freely.” 

2-37 Kaikeyi gave them ascetic’s dress ( 37 / 1577 ) 

When King ordered for royal army and treasury to follow Ram in forest Ram interfered, 
“Of what utility they are in forest ? I am there to live an ascetic’s life. I have to discard all 
luxurious style, then how would they serve me. I need ascetic’s dress to put on and not 
the royal facilities.” Hearing this, Kaikeyi immediately brought the bark dresses and gave 
to Ram. He along with Lakshaman wore them and took off the royal fine dress from their 
body. Sita also tried but wear that but she couldn’t do that. While Ram helped in tying 
the bark over her silk dress the royal ladies shed tears. 

The royal ladies asked Ram, “Leave her back with us. We would get solace in your 
absence.” Ram continued putting bark on her body, while the women were forbidding 
her. 

Vashishath couldn’t bear the scene and burst out, “Kaikeyi, you have misled the king. 
You have transgressed all limits and caused a slur on the royal family. Sita has not been 
banished. In absence of Ram she will be the king who is equivalent to Ram. Even if she 
goes in forest we will all follow her. Let her be sent with royal facilities and stay in forest 
with Ram. Why shall she wear the mendicant’s dress? Bharat is son of Dasarath and he 
is aware of the rule of dynasty. He won’t rule the way you like. Both Bharat and 
Shatrughn shall remain in forest with Ram. You would be left alone to enjoy the desolate 
state. Where Ram is not present there is no kingdom. When he is in forest, the forest 
shall be kingdom for us.” 


Page 17 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


On Vashishath’s interference she was prevented from wearing the bark, but she didn’t 
revoke her decision to go with Ram. 

2-38 Dasarath to protect Kauslya ( 18 / 1595) 

When Sita was given the bark the people outside were denouncing the king. Hearing 
them, Dasarath once again got grip of remorse and sorrow. He sorrowfully asked 
Kaikeyi, “Why do you offer bark to her? She is not pledged to be banished. Look on her 
royal lineage and her tender physique, how do you dare bring a bark for her. Your 
meanness has crossed all limits. I personally deserve death for all such events.” 

Reproaching Kaikeyi and grieving on his fault, he swooned and fell on ground. After a 
short while, Ram addressed him politely, “Take care of my aged mother Kauslya. She is 
weak and in my absence her sorrow would make her further weak. You are commander 
for all of us. Let my mother be under your proper care.” 

2-39 Chariot for Ram, and Kausalya counseled Sita (41 / 1636) 

The words of Ram again stoked his sorrow and along with his wives he fell unconscious. 
Regaining the normalcy, he uttered, “Kaikeyi is the root cause of all the miseries. I ask 
for death but that doesn’t visit me. One can’t get rid of the misery by inviting ultimate end 
of death on his sweet will. He has to go through all the tribulations. I must have caused 
separation of several families in the past and that has caused the separation of my son 
also from me.” 

He uttered, “Ram” and his voice got choked with grief. He fell fainted. When he 
recovered, he asked Sumantr to bring the chariot for them to take them beyond the 
territory. Hearing his command, Sumantr went out and came back to inform the king 
about the readiness of the chariot. 

Dasarath asked the courtiers to bring choicest jewels for Sita from treasure. The 
excellent ones were immediately produced before Sita. She bejeweled her body as 
desired by Dasarath. 

Kausalya got hold of Sita in her arms and advised her, “Husband is the sole deity of a 
woman. When my son would be in forest never criticize him for inadequacy of 
convenience or comfort to you.” Sita assured her to obey her commands and also 
mentioned, “With your blessings I am aware of wives responsibility to husband. How 
could I dare displease or discourage him in forest ?" 

While talking with Sita she again began shedding tears. Ram approached her and asked 
for her blessings. He advised her to take full care of the king. The period of fourteen 
years would pass in winking of your sleeping eyes and I would be back in good health 
and spirit to offer my salutation to you. 

Ram looked upon three hundred fifty co-wives (2-39-36, and also 2-34-13) of the king 
accompanying Kausalya and prayed for pardon if he had committed any mistake 
unknowingly in the past. 

While Ram was taking leave of them wail and cry overtook the inner palace. 


Page 18 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2- 40 Ram left the palace (51 / 1687) 

Ram with Sita and Lakshaman gave round to the king and left touching his feet. They 
also touched the feet of mothers. When Lakshaman touch the feet of Sumitra following 
Kausalya, she asked him, “Ram is Dasarath, and Sita is Sumitra, forest is Ayodhya. See 
that Ram never faces any trouble.” 

When they came out, Sumantr with folded hands requested them to board the chariot. 
All three immediately got into the chariot and Sumantr drove fast on the royal avenue. 
Sea of people followed the chariot asking Sumantr to go slow while Ram asked him to 
drive fast. The dust behind the chariot was subdued with tears of the people following 
that. 

Dasarath came out to see Ram going. Kausalya was running behind as a cow runs for 
her calf. Ram could see the parents coming on foot and he asked Sumantr to drive fast. 
Dasarath cried and asked Sumantr to stop but Ram advised him to keep going. Thus 
Ram came out of the sight of the parents who couldn’t follow longer. 

2-41 Mourning on departure (21 / 1708) 

The lamentations of the queens from the inner rented the air of Ayodhya. They were 
looking for their supreme protector Ram who had been banished by the king. The 
citizens of Ayodhya were deep in sorrow. There was no fire burnt neither for sandhya 
oblation nor for cooking. The mourning isolated everyone. Wife didn’t look for husband, 
nor son asked for mother, nor sister looked for brother. The animals were also shocked 
to the extent that the morsels in their mouth stayed unchewed. Neither the calf nor the 
mother cow came closer for feeding. Elephants remained stationary. The planets and 
stars disappeared from the sky. The sun set instantly with darkness all around. The pall 
of gloom spread over all the quarters made the nakshatra of Vishakha ( 2 - 41 - 12 ) hazy 
and dim. 

2-42 Dasarth came lamenting to Kausalya’s palace (34 / 1742) 

Dasarath kept watching the chariot and the dusty trail it had left moving forward. When 
the dusty trail became invisible, he turned and fell fainted on the ground. Kausalya on his 
right, and Kaikeyi on his left tried to lift his dust smeared body. Having seen, Kaikeyi 
lifting him, he spoke, “Kaikeyi, don’t touch me. I revoke all pledges made to fire during 
our marriage and not only for this world, in another world too I renounce you. If Bharat 
feels gratified in ascending the throne, let the rites performed by him on my death, not 
reach me.” 

Lamenting about Ram, he returned back to the city, “The one who always enjoyed the 
royal facilities now shall lie on ground under a tree. When the lord of the universe (2-42- 
18) shall rise in the morning with his body smeared with dust, the forest would behold 
him like an orphan. I lost both my sons and the beloved daughter-in-law who had never 
been to the thorny route of the forest. Kaikeyi, a widow would now enjoy the rule of the 
state." 

When he asked attendants, “Take me to Kaushlay’s palace”, he was taken there and laid 
on a couch. He felt desolated and dejected. When the night had descended and it was 
approaching midnight, he asked Kausalya, “My eye sight has departed with Ram. I am 


Page 19 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


not able to see you. Keep your hands on my body.” Hearing him speaking sadly, 
Kausalya sat close to him. 

2-43 Kausalya complained to king (21 / 1763) 

While the king was lost in Ram, Kausalya turning towards him began thinking aloud 
which was mix of her complaint to Kaikeyi, as well as good wishes to Ram, “Kaikeyi has 
become supreme by sending Ram to forest. Like a poisonous snake she will now turn 
towards me to put me in trouble. My two sons are in forest. The daughter-in-law who 
could have never imagined about such calamity would now be entering dreadful forest. I 
would be really lucky when my sons would comeback keeping Sita in their front. I would 
be delighted to see the sea of people welcoming them by showering laja (paddy’s 
popcorn) when they would pass through the royal avenue.” 

2-44 Sumitra assuaged Kausalya’s agony (31 / 1794) 

Intervening Kausalya, Sumitra spoke to her in her bid to assuage her agony, “Ram is 
truthful, valiant and bold. His righteousness would cause sun, gods of wind and water to 
take his proper care. When the compassionate and ace archer Lakshaman is with him, 
let there be no cause of any concern. Sita would be protected by both of them. She 
knew the hardships of forest life and she willingly chose that life to help her husband in 
forest. Ram is himself god of gods and she is goddess Lakshmi (2-44-15/16/17), and 
looking to the potential they have Ayodhya and forest are alike. Due to steadfast state of 
mind Ram considers the forest life and royal life in Ayodhya in the same category, 
neither the former painful, nor the latter comfortable. At this moment to encourage the 
distressed people of Ayodhya is the great responsibility and it could be executed by you 
only. Everybody looks to you now. You will see how Ram will come back victorious in 
time, and when he would touch your feet your welling eyes would shed joyful tears over 
his head.” Kausalya was highly encouraged by her words and she got confidence to 
steer through the tough time. 

2-45 Ram arrived at Tamasa river ( 33 / 1827) 

Although the king had comeback citizens of Ayodhya had been following the chariot. 
Ram addressed them, “I respect your affection to me. My sincere request to all of you 
now is to show your affection on Bharat. He is the prince and the command of the king is 
to be carried by all of us. I am leaving for forest to honour the king’s command. Bharat is 
young but matured, and he affectionate to all.” 

They continued moving and time and again he heard the prayer of the people to come 
back. There were group of elder vajpeyi Brahmins in the crowd behind Ram. Those 
Brahmins carry white umbrella as a custom and they offered their umbrella to Ram while 
they offered their request to the horses carrying the chariot, “O, fast and mighty horses, 
please do listen to our requests and stop taking him to forest. Get him back to 
Ayodhaya." 

Hearing those Brahmins speaking to horses, Ram along with Sita and Lakshaman quit 
the chariot and began moving on foot forward towards forest. This caused surprises to 
the Brahmins who again requested him to stop as some of the Brahmins had 
commenced offering fire oblation. They also mentioned, “The birds either have been 
grieved by your movement to forest as they have become totally stationary over the tree 


Page 20 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


tops. Look at them and have mercy on all of us.” By this time, Tamasa river was in view. 
While Ram stopped, Sumantr made the horses free to relax, take water and graze 
around there. 

2-46 Ram quit secretly ( 34 / 1861) 

The sun had set and darkness of the night had begun. Ram spoke to Sumantr to take of 
the horses. Sumantr brought them back to safe place from grazing. Being the first night 
out of Ayodhya, Ram indicated to Lakshaman and Sita, “This is our first night and we 
should fully understand the constraints of the forest life. He preferred to remain on water 
that night. Time and again he praised the affection of the accompanying people of 
Ayodhya. 

Sumantr and Lakshamn prepared the bed for Ram using leaves from the nearby places. 
Ram and Sita slept and Lakshaman continued them watching without a wink. He 
discussed with Sumantr as how the high standard of righteousness has been 
demonstrated by Ram. Night was about to end, Ram awoke and advised Lakshaman, 
“Let us move out quietly otherwise the people of Ayodhya is so much determined that 
they appear to sacrifice their life for us.” Lakshaman agreed to his proposal, and 
Sumantr immediately made the chariot ready. Mounting the chariot they crossed deep 
pool of Tamasa. After crossing the river Ram advised Sumantr to take the chariot in 
opposite direction and then after some distance take the route to forest so that our 
people couldn’t get any clue of direction of departure. As advised Sumantr did 
accordingly and finally they moved fast leaving the people of Ayodhya sleeping on the 
river bank. 

2- 47 Accompanying crowd came back (19/ 1880) 

The people when got up found their beloved gone. Then, repented a lot on their luck. 
They cursed the slumber and thought of ending their life in his absence. After sometime 
they searched out the track of the chariot but after a while they the trace disappeared. 
Dejected they moved back to Ayodhya. When they saw the city they became more sad 
of coming back to the place where Ram didn’t live. 

2-48 Lamenting women of Ayodhya (37 / 1917) 

When the citizens came back to their houses, the inmates, wives and sons began 
reproaching them, “Lucky is Lakshaman who could accompany him, and misfortune fell 
on our men who lost Ram and came back.” The continued praising the luck of each and 
every element of forest: river, pond, trees, mountains, plants and bushes etc. who would 
enjoy the presence of Ram. While lamenting thus they cursed time and again Kaikeyi, “ 
We would leave this city and go to a place where we would never hear anything about 
this woman who discarded the ablest of the sons, and husband. We would die than to 
remain under her rule. 

The city bore a deserted look. The shutters of the shops remained down without any 
transaction and business. The day ended and the gloomy dark night descended over the 
city. Houses had no cooking fire, no oblation to fire god, and Brahmins didn’t recite veda. 


Page 21 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-49 Ram crossed several rivers ( 18 / 1935) 

Moving further from Tamasa, he crossed the river Vedashruti. Thereafter pacing fast 
towards forest he crossed the river Gomati. While crossing river Syandika, he spoke to 
Sita, “This river forms the southern boundary of Kosal desh ruled by Ikshavaku received 
in legacy from Manu.” On way he heard several villagers indicating towards them and 
saying, “The king Dasarath under the evil influence of his queen Kaikeyi, has banished 
his righteous son Ram to forest. He is now on way to forest accompanied by his wife and 
brother.” 

Ram praised the natural environmental of the area passing after Kosal boundary where 
sages had been staying for long. He reminisced his early age hunting in the forest 
adjoining Saryu. He wondered whether after coming back from the forest exile when he 
would unite with his mother and father would get any chance again to go for hunting in 
the forest near Saryu. 

2-50 Ram met his fond friend Guh (51 / 1986) 

Crossing the border of the land of kosal, Ram became emotional with tears in his eyes 
and looking towards Ayodhya raised his folded hands up to pay sincere respect to the 
kingdom he had left. To the people of the passing villages who had gathered around 
him, he asked softly, “Look after your dwellings and family.” 

Moving ahead, he reached shringberpur (2-50-26) and the scene around sacred river 
G anga slowly began unfolding. The river Ganga had genesis in the holey feet of lord 
Vishnu, and before she descended on earth with the efforts of Bhagirath, passed 
through the mighty hair locks of Shiv, and is lovely consort of sea. The river Ganga and 
its surrounding presented various pleasing sights. Some where the trees along the 
Ganga made it attractive, at another place she looked like a woven beautiful braid of a 
charming maid where water passed calmly in a narrow stream. Along the stream the 
Ganga had varying views. At some places deep pools were seen, while at other the 
Ganga flowed past producing musical notes. Varieties of birds had flocked at several 
places to enjoy cool water. The sacred Ganga river is abode of the celestials visiting 
regularly to enjoy and relax. In the celestial world having abundance of lotus she is 
called devpadmini. 

Coming close to the Ganga, Ram spotted a tree of Ingudi, and indicated Sumantr to 
have a night stop there. While Sumantr unyoked the horses and allowed them to relax 
and enjoy the water of Ganga, Lakshaman made other arrangements. Lakshaman 
washed his feet when he settled on the ground. 

In the meanwhile, the king of Nishad tribe, named Guh heard about his arrival. He 
rushed to him with several auspicious items including grains, water, varieties of juices, 
food, sleeping beds, horse food etc. in his honour. When Ram saw his friend Guh 
coming he moved forward and embraced him in his arms. 

Guh welcoming him spoke, “There can’t be a more prestigious and lovely guest than 
you. Ram, you take this place as your home and relax fully offering me to a chance to 
demonstrate hospitality to you.” Ram welcoming and praising his affection mentioned, 
“Under a vow I can’t accept your luxurious items. I have to remain as an ascetic on roots 
and fruits. Today I would stay on water. I would like to receive your help in keeping the 


Page 22 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


king Dasarath’s horses satisfied.” Guh immediately commanded to make arrangements 
of food and water for the horses. 

Performing his routine rites to the setting sun in the west, Ram took water brought by 
Lakshaman and later retired for the night. 

2-51 Night vigil by Lakshaman and Guh ( 27 / 2013) 

Lakshamn kept awake and maintained a vigil by taking a position away from the place 
where Ram and Sita were sleeping. Guh came to him and advised him to take rest over 
the bed prepared by his men for him only and he further mentioned, “We tribal people 
are habitual of hardship but for you this is a tough life. Take rest and believe me I would 
maintain guard here. No one in this world is as dear to me as my friend Ram (2-51-4). “ 


Lakshaman spoke to him, “I trust your capability and having been here with you enjoy 
full safety. However, when Ram and Sita are sleeping over ground how could I sleep 
and enjoy the pleasure of life !. I am afraid of mishap of death of king Dasarath who 
had obtained Ram as his son after so much of religious effort. Kauslya becoming widow 
could also meet the same fate whose lovely lone son is in exile. Sumitra would sustain 
her life is also doubtful, but she could survive to see Shatrughn. Shall we get back safely 
after exile ?” While Lakshaman continued lamenting and interacting with Guh, the night 
ended. 

2-52 Ram crossed the Ganga ( 102 / 2115) 

When the day broke Ram asked Lakshaman to cross the Ganga soon. Lakshaman then 
requested Guh to arrange for crossing. Guh immediately arranged a boat and informed 
Ram about the readiness of the boat with a boatman. Ram with Lakshaman and Sita 
was about to move towards the boat that Sumantr intervened. Ram advised him to go 
back and take care of the grieving king. Sumantr couldn’t bear the separation and with 
voice choked he burst into tears. Ram very affectionately consoled him reminding his 
greater responsibility, “At present when the king is in trouble, he would bank more on 
you. See that he doesn’t lose his patience and regains his normal lifeo. Pay my salution 
to the king and all mothers. Advise king to send for Bharat and soon install him as regent 
prince which he wanted. Advise Bharat to be careful to Sumitra and Kauslya as he 
would be his mother Kaikeyi." 

Hearing Ram, Sumantr again submitted, “I may speak like your friend for which I seek 
pardon. How can I get back without you ? My empty chariot would aggravate the 
condition of the king and Kauslya. You are aware of the pitiable condition of the people 
of Ayodhya, who had followed you. How can I assuage them? If I go and tell Kauslya 
that you have been taken to the maternal uncle’s place, how about this? Can I speak lie? 
But it would be improper. If you desert me I would jump with the chariot into fire. I assure 
you that if you take me along in forest, I would keep your going convenient. I would also 
be benefited greatly by your kind association. I would go back taking you in the same 
chariot when your exile of fourteen years ends.” 


Page 23 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


Trying to take him in confidence in several ways, Ram spoke, “My first priority of sending 
you soon to Ayodhya is to assure Kaikeyi that the king is true to his words and Ram has 
been exiled as committed to her. Unless you go back she will be in doubt, and your 
return will give her a proof of my departure to forest.” 

Ram turning towards Guh mentioned, “This forest here is inhabited and I can’t stay here. 

I need to go the remote forest where ascetics stay. I need to dress my hair also as 
ascetics do. I need your help if you could get me the banyan tree secretion which works 
as a glue.” Guh immediately arranged the banyan secretion and Ram along with 
Lakshaman dressed their hair style as that of ascetics. Before leaving Ram advised Guh 
to be alert and careful to army, treasury, fortress, and people to keep the state happy. 
When he reached near the boat he asked Lakshaman to arrange first the entry of Sita to 
the boat and after he (Lakshaman) would get into the boat. Lakshaman followed his 
advice and when Sita and he were into the boat, Ram boarded after them. When Guh 
asked the boatman to move, Ram along with Sita performed religious rite of achamany 
(sipping holy Canga water) followed by recitation of scriptural mantra applicable to both 
kshatirya and Brahmin together. Lakshaman also performed appropriate rites with the 
holy Ganga water. 

Bidding good bye to Guh and Sumantr, Ram taking a seat asked the boatman to sail the 
boat across the river Ganga. When the boat reached the midstream Sita offered her 
prayer and worship to the goddess Ganga, saying, “You are tripathga , the one who has 
prevalence in all the three domains of heaven, earth and netherworld. I with my 
husband Ram and his brother Lakshaman are now going to stay in forest. I would 
worship you when coming back safely on expiry of fourteen years of exile to my 
husband.” She also pledged, “When Ram gets back the kingdom after completion of the 
specified period, I would donate thousands of cows, cloths and grains to Brahmins with 
the sole intention to please you. My offer to you shall consist of thousands of jars full of 
sweet juice, and pots full of rice cooked by me.” 

The boat reached the right side of Ganga and they coming down of the boat move 
towards the forest. Ram addressing Lakshaman cautioned him, “This uninhabited forest 
may be dangerous. You need to lead by keeping Sita in the centre. I would guard both of 
you from the rear” , and accordingly they arranged their position. 

Sumantr whose eyes were chasing Ram couldn’t see them further after they came to the 
right side bank of Ganga and moved forward in forest. He stood deeply depressed. 

After crossing some rugged terrain they passed through Vats regions where cereal 
crops were found in abundance. They saw four varieties of deer: varah, rishya, prishyat, 
and maharuru. They halted for some time and took the wild fruits to satisfy their hunger. 

Note: Shlok 2-52-89 is erroneously translated by some persons that Sita committed to offer liquor and meat 
with rice to goddess Ganga. Correct etymology, if used, never supports this incorrect translation of the 
original Sanskrit text. Similar error is committed commonly in translating shlok 2-52-102. 

2-53 Ram lamented at third night (35 / 2150) 

Ram stayed at night near a tree in a lonely place. He spoke, “ Lakshaman this is the first 
night when we are without Sumantr. Let us keep all vigil for Sita and I would awake the 
full night.” He further reflected on the prevailing condition in Ayodhya, “ Kaikeyi must be 
very happy to realize her goal of crowning his son Bharat. The king, Kausalya and 


Page 24 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


Sumitra must be in grief. Feeling winsome and subduing the king, Kaikeyi would further 
put them in trouble. Lakshaman, I therefore ask you to henceforth move for Ayodhya and 
take care of the grieved parents. I would proceed further to forest with Sita.” 

Ram continued lamenting, but Lakshamana interfered, “ If you lament like this, you could 
imagine our state of misery. How we would survive without you ? It is not proper and 
now I won’t be back to Ayodhya in your absence.” 

Hearing bold Lakshaman, Ram resolved to stay in the forest with Lakshman and they 
spent their night deliberating about the code of conducts prescribed for ascetics while 
occupying the bed prepared near the banyan tree. 

2-54 Ram at the hermitage of Bhardwaj (43 / 2193) 

Following morning after sunrise they moved forward comfortably and before end of the 
day they could see the column of smoke rising at a distant horizon. Ram indicated that 
place to be Prayag (2-54-5) at the confluence of the Canga and Yamuna. The smoke - 
place could be the ashram of Bhardwaj. Gradually they arrived at the hermitage, and 
before entering stopped for a while outside. Entering the ashram they offered their 
salutation to the sage Bhardwaj who was surrounded by other sages, birds and animals. 

Ram introduced themselves to him and mentioned that he was on exile by his father and 
the other two my wife and brother were accompanying him. The sage welcoming them 
offered water and madhupark ( a sweet soft drink made of curd, honey and milk) and 
other items of roots and fruits. He also mentioned, “You are coming after a long time (2- 
54-21), and I have already heard about your unreasonable banishment. You are 
welcome at this ashram and stay here comfortably.” 

Ram submitted, “This ashram is close to city and nearby countryside. The people, when 
having knowledge of my stay here might crowd the place. I would therefore prefer to stay 
at some lonely place free from the countryside visitors.” The sage advised him, “In that 
case, better choose a place at Chitrakoot where several known ascetics continue in their 
meditation. Chitrakoot is about 10 kosha 1 from here. A look at the mountain of Chitrakoot 
absolves one of sins. It has lovely and enriched natural environment with abundance of 
honey and fruits along with trees, plants, birds, animals and rivers. You either choose 
that place or stay here.” 

Ram spent the night comfortably at the sage’s ashram engaged in several spiritual 
discourses, and next morning sought the permission of the sage to depart for Chitrakoot. 

2-55 On way to Chitrakoot (34 / 2227) 

When Ram offered salutation to the sage, he himself first performed swastyayan, (a 
recitation of sacred religious mantra) wishing their welfare and came out to see them off 
as if a father had come out to give a farewell to the sons and daughter-in-law. 

He pointed out to the river Yamuna (variously called k alindi - the beloved daughter of 
sun god), and advised, “From the confluence point, on the upstream, take Yamuna 
coming from the west, cross it first using the self prepared raft. Thereafter there is a 


1 

Kosha now- a -days stands for 2 miles, but it is evident the same unit of measurement meant about 8 miles in the shlok 
5-54-28 and 5-55-8. 


Page 25 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


banyan tree called Syama, and Sita should offer her obeisance to that tree. Either stay 
there or if you move ahead about one kosha the blue forest touching the kalindi’s bank 
will attract your attention. It has beautiful mix of trees of bamboos, palash and badari. 
That route will lead you to Chitrakoot which I have used for visiting the place several 
times.” 

Ram then prayed the sage to be back to his hermitage. After responding with good 
wishes to their salutations the sage came back to his hermitage. 

Moving ahead Ram reached the indicated place for crossing Yamuna. Both Ram and 
Lakshaman prepared one beautiful raft. Getting Sita first onto the board, they mounted 
the raft later after keeping their arms by the side of Sita. Sailing the raft across Yamuna 
when they arrived mid stream, Sita with folded hands, offered her prayer to the goddess 
Kalindi, “ My husband is moving to forest on a vow. On successful completion of the vow 
and on return journey I would offer thousands of cows, and hundreds of jars filled with 
sweet drinks in your honour.” Thereafter they landed happily on the southern bank of the 
river kalindi. 

Moving ahead they arrived at syama tree where Sita offered her obeisance with folded 
palms, “Accept my prayer and grant successful completion of vow of my husband. Grant 
us the opportunity to get back safely to see our mothers Kauslya and Sumitra.” Saying 
thus she completed one round of the syama tree. 

While Sita was offering her prayer, Ram advised Lakshaman, “Take a lead and Sita will 
follow you. I would be keeping guard of both of your from behind. Allow Sita to enjoy the 
natural scene, and keep her happy meeting her desire whatever she expresses.” 

As planned, they moved by keeping Sita in the centre. Lakshaman used to bring 
varieties of attractive flowers for which Sita expressed her wishes. Several varieties of 
flowers over plants she had not seen earlier contributed in her great visual delight. She 
enjoyed the river side forest resonating with the sound of several birds including 
peacocks and cuckoos. They paused on way for their food, enjoying at the same time 
scene of movement of the lovely deer around. Further, finding a plain and suitable place 
they stopped for their night halt. 

Note: The meaning of shlok 2-55-34 is again misconstrued, and it requires proper understanding of 
background of the forest journey of Ram, the creator of the three worlds. 

2-56 Chitrakoot (38 / 2265) 

The brightness of dawn was visible. Ram awoke Lakshaman, “O valiant one, now get 
up 2 we have to continue our journey to Chitrakoot.” Lakshaman responded immediately 
shunning his sloth and they again set out towards their destination. While continuing the 
journey they could see from a distance the peaks of the Chitrakoot mountain. Coming 
closer the trees were found dangling honey mesh in abundance. There were loads of 
tasty fruits on various trees. The melodious sound of birds, peacock responding to 
chatak, and others fluttering their wings were the common scene. Passing through the 
pleasant scene they arrived at the ashram of Valmiki. When they offered their respectful 
salutation to the sage, he honoured them and offered proper seating. 


2 It is said that Lakshaman never slept during 14 yrs of forest life, but this shlok 56-1 contradicts this. 


Page 26 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


Ram impressed by the environment, asked Lakshaman to raise the shelter around there. 
Soon the timber logs were collected and a full set of the shelter was made ready having 
roof of the leaves. 

Ram assisted by Lakshaman made the preparations for vastu shanti (performing 
auspicious rites before entering a new shelter). Black roots dear to Ram, other 
auspicious items of grains, fruits, honey etc. were collected. The black roots were baked 
in fire (for which Ram had a craving) and along with other items the worship of fire and 
other gods were performed. On completion of the auspicious rites Ram, Lakshaman and 
Sita entered the cottage. They were so delighted at Chitrakoot that for time being they 
forgot all their concerns about Ayodhya. 

Note: 

(i) From shlok 2-56-23 onwards, at several places the word “mams” and “krishn mriga” had 
been translated as meat of black deer. It is not correct. The meaning of “mams” is 
understood by “mam W{" + “ asa m {mj) ”, which really means “my food” and not 
meat. 

(ii) Mriga is understood by conjunction of the words mri (J (jjFO + ga ^ (wOwhich means 
the one found moving buried in soil, i.e., roots. It is unimaginable, how could Ram who 
had very categorically told Guh that he was on vow and would remain on roots and fruits 
would take the meat as some of the commentators have mistakenly understood so. 

2-57 Sumantr reported to the King ( 34 / 2299) 

After crossing the Ganga by Ram, Sumantr along with Guh had discussed helplessly for 
quite long. Guh got message from his people that Ram after visiting Bhardwaj at Prayag 
had gone to Chitrakoota. Sumantr engaging the horses to the chariot moved towards 
Ayodhya with a very heavy heart. He reached the city in three days. The people crowded 
his chariot and he spoke, “When Ram crossed the Ganga I came bank.” The people 
once again fell in grief. Sumantr passing seven ramparts of the royal palaces entered the 
eighth one where the king was staying. He reported to the king the message conveyed 
by Ram. The king hearing the message fell unconscious. Kausalya had several attack 
of fits and losing her balance spoke to king, “Why are you ashamed now? Sumantr had 
come back, why don’t you ask about your beloved son? Don’t fear, Kaikeyi is not hnere.” 
Hearing her lamentations the women and men of the palace and the city together raised 
a lamenting cry. 

2-58 Dasarath again called Sumantr for report ( 37 / 2336) 

When Dasarath came back to his consciousness, he called again Sumantr and asked 
about the messages from Ram, Lakshaman and Sita. He also wanted to know, “How, 
habitual of royal treatment my sons and daughter-in-law are loitering in forest?" Sumantr 
repeated the message of Ram, “Offer my salutations to the king, all mothers. Advise 
Kaushalya to take proper care of the king, as husband is the ultimate god of a married 
woman. Advise Bharat to take all mothers on equal footing and obey the command of 
the king who is still on throne.” 

Sumantr mentioned, “As regards Lakshamana’s message, he was very angry and he 
spoke to convey that how did the king dare banish such a righteous son to forest. I don’t 
consider him as my father. From now onwards Ram is my father, friend, well wisher and 
everything.” 


Page 27 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


“As regards Sita” , Sumantr said, “ She couldn’t speak any word. She continued 
shedding tears while gazing at the chariot.” 

2-59 Frequent fits to Dasarath ( 34 / 2370) 

Sumantr continued with his experience how the natural entities were noticed deeply 
grieved of Ram’s departure to forest, “When I tried to engage horses to the chariot after 
crossing of the Ganga by Ram, the horses avoided accepting the yoke. I could see how 
the buds and flowers have weathered away. The water of pools, lakes and rivers have 
become hot. The leaves of the trees have become parched and falling on the ground. 
The fish have fallen to mud level. Lotus have weathered and fallen down in water and 
mud. The people of Ayodhya became so remorseful when they saw my chariot devoid of 
Ram.” 

Hearing Sumantr the king spoke feebly, “Instead of being trapped in a woman’s words I 
could have contacted the elders, ministers and sacred texts. I didn’t do that and now I 
have fallen in a deep sea of sorrow. I won’t live if I don’t see Ram. Take me in chariot to 
Ram or else immediately bring him back, this is the king’s command." 

Lamenting thus the king had passed though repeating cycles of fits of unconsciousness 
and consciousness. However, this drew the attention of Kausalya, and she got 
concerned about the deteriorating condition of the king. 

2-60 Sumantr consoled Kausalya ( 23 / 2403) 

She asked the charioteer to take her immediately to the forest, “She won’t bear anymore 
the parting pangs. Take back now the chariot and show me the forest where they 
reside.” Sumantr with folded hands submitted, “There is nothing for concern as the 
righteous Ram has a strong resolve to honor the king’s words. The forest is like their city 
garden, and they take the forest as if they are on visit to the outskirt forest of the city. 
Sita doesn’t have to think about anything as she is under the protection of Ram.” 

2-61 Kauslya complained her helplessness ( 27 / 2430) 

Not satisfied by the consoling words of Sumantr, Kauslya turned towards the king and 
mentioned, “I am so helpless. How can a wise father send a righteous son to forest? The 
one who ever enjoyed the royal facilities has been sent to forest for such a long period. 
Even if he comes back in fifteenth year, I wonder, he will accept the state ruled by his 
younger brother. At any occasion when Brahmins are served food after the food has 
been served to other relatives, they don’t accept it. Similarly Ram won’t accept the state 
for rule which has first been in the possession of his younger. It is said for a woman the 
husband is first refuge, son is the second refuge, relatives are the third refuge. For me 
none of them are available. You are happy with the happiness of Kaikeyi and Bharat.” 
Hearing her lamentation, Dasarath was again gripped by the deep grief. 

2-62 Dasarath sought favor from Kauslya ( 21 / 2451) 

His grief caused him to lose his consciousness. After long time he regained his 
consciousness, and began reflecting on his past deeds. He recalled his misdeed of once 
shooting a shaft mistaken by a particular sound and hit mortally the unseen human 
target. That incident and the present one of Ram compounded his grief. With folded 
hand, having his head low he spoke to Kauslya, “ I know I am the culprit. You are a 
compassionate woman showering mercy on others. Even if a husband is devoid of 


Page 28 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


virtues he is respectful for his wife. Have mercy on me and see my appeal to you with 
my joined palms to you.” 

Looking to the king, Kauslya regained her reasons and felt very sorry for complaining 
time and again his misdeeds. She admitted her fault. By the end of the fifth day of Ram’s 
banishment, the night has descended and Dasarath fell to sleep. 

2-63 Dasarath recalled killing an unseen target ( 56 / 2507) 

After a while he got up and recalled the misdeed he had once committed when he was 
regent prince of the state. He compared his present misdeed of banishing Ram, and 
once killing unseen person with that of an ignorant boy who cuts mango tree and 
nurtures pa/as tree misguided by leaf and flower of the latter. When the pa/as tree bears 
fruits the boy begins repenting in vain on cutting off the mango tree. 

He narrated the incident to Kauslya, “Then you were unmarried, and I was a prince. I 
was fond of hunting the target by aiming on the sound coming out from the destination. It 
was rainy season. The heat of the day was lowered down by a down pour. The day has 
come to end. The clear river water was getting mixed with runoff carrying mix of minerals 
and soil. In the night time I went out aboard my chariot along the bank of Saryu for 
hunting. I could hit successfully two wild animals of lesser breed. I heard a sound 
resembling that of an elephant. My shooting shaft hit the unseen target. The sound was 
from a pitcher being drowned in water. I heard the voice of a lamenting human being.” 

The man was complaining, “Out of city I stay in forest as an ascetic. I did no harm to any 
body, and what he will gain by killing me. With one arrow he has killed me and my 
parents.” When I approached the wailing person lying on ground oozing blood, he 
glanced on me and spoke, “ O, King! why did you kill me ? I didn’t commit any mistake. 
Now take out the arrow from my body, I am in deep trouble.” 

I knew that if I took out the arrow from his body he would die instantly, but I began 
taking out the shaft and he continued speaking, “Dasarath, my blind hermit parents must 
have lost the thirst by this time. Sure, they must have been concerned about my return. 
Follow this track and take water to them. I assure you, if you see them, they would 
pardon you. I also carry no grudge, and with my stable mind I like to remind you that 
don’t repent of killing a Brahmin. I am son of a shudra mother from a vaishya father.” 

Dasarath further mentioned, “No sooner the shaft came out of his body than he dropped 
dead.” 

2-64 Dasarath completed the story ( 79 / 2586) 

Dasarath further narrated to Kauslya, “As indicated by the young ascetic, with pot full of 
water I took the track and reached the ascetics ashram.” Hearing the sound of my 
nearing steps, the blind aged ascetic spoke, “ O, son ! you have been delayed. Don’t 
worry, come inside and give us water. Why you are not speaking to us, I am surprised.” 
“Hearing those words" , Dasarath said, “ I broke my silence with great courage. I am a 
kshatriya warrior, and my name is Dasarath. I came on hunting. Hearing the sound of 
the water pot being drowned in water I charged an arrow over your son mistaking that as 
an elephant , and he is now no more.” 


Page 29 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


The ascetic could not control his wrath and spoke, “If you have not spoken yourself the 
truth, your head would have fallen into hundreds of pieces. Not only that your illustrious 
Ikshavaku dynasty would have been ruined also. Take us immediately to our son.” 

When they were taken to place where young ascetic’s body was lying, they touched his 
body and applauding his services so far grieved for their future fate in his absence. They 
offered their water homage to the deceased ascetic. One beautiful spirit came out of the 
body and joined Indr in heaven. While leaving the spirit spoke to the old ascetic couple, 
“You will soon join me in heaven.” 

The old couple were so aggrieved that they also died and before dying the old one 
cursed me, “ As I am dying of the separation of my son, you will also meet the same 
fate.” 

Dasarath continued, “O, Kauslya ! The time has come for my departure. I won’t now 
survive the separation of Ram. I repent of falling a prey to cruel and sinner Kaikeyi. I 
appreciate the patience demonstrated by you and Sumitra.” 

Thus lamenting and reflecting, it was after midnight, that the King breathed his last. 

2-65 Dasarath passed away ( 29 / 2615) 

Customary to royal house, the bards in the morning collected to eulogize the glory of the 
king and began presenting their song and music. Other attendants also gathered and 
made all arrangements for bath of the king. Those who had an access to the king, when 
reached near him found him motionless. They found Kauslya and Sumitra sleeping. 
When they were confirmed of the death of the king, they began with a wailing cry which 
caused Kauslya and Sumitra to wake up. 

Having come to know of the king’s ultimate departure, Kauslya fainted and fell on the 
ground. Kaikeyi and other queens began crying. Soon the palace was under gloom of 
the king’s demise. 

2-66 Lamenting family (29 / 2644) 

While Kauslya and others were denouncing Kaikeyi for the ultimate sorrow, the ministers 
arranged to keep the dead body of the king an oil trough. Because none of his sons was 
present the cremation couldn’t be conducted. The city, relatives and country’s crowd 
bemoaned the death of the valorous king. Kauslya while wailing apprehended the 
mishap with Janaka also, “Sita is his only issue, and she is in forest. When he would 
learn about the incidents, how would he bear all these! “ 

Thus lamenting the day passed off and darkness of night set in. 

2-67 Sages apprehend sufferings ( 38 / 2682) 

The night passed off with wails and cry. When the sun rose, the priests and Brahmins in- 
charge of coronation and crowning gathered at the royal palace, and among them were 
Markandeya, Modgalya, Vamdev, Kasyap, Katyayan, Gautam, and Jabali. They together 
met the family preceptor Vashishath and mentioned, “Ram and Lakshaman are in forest. 
Bharat and Shatrughn are in maternal uncle’s place in the city of Rajgriha, of Kekaya 
desh. When the king has passed away the kingdom is now like a boat without a rudder. 
There is no body from the royal family who could take command of the state.” 


Page 30 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


One by one they enumerated, “what happens when there is no king of a kingdom: The 
religious rites are stopped. Business transactions don’t take place. Merrymaking and 
auspicious functions don’t take place. The enemy of the adjoining territory become 
active. Those who have been punished by the king become active and work with 
vengeance." 

They continued narrating all sorts of sufferings which the state might have to face if there 
is no king in command. 

2-68 The messengers to Bharat ( 22 / 2704 ) 

Hearing the sages Vashishatha proposed to send messenger to Bharat whom the king 
had wished the kingdom. Getting the consent of all, he called Sidhartha, Vijay, Jayant, 
Ashok and Nandan and asked them to immediately move to bring Bharat and 
Shatrughan from their maternal uncle’s place. He asked them to convey, “The royal 
preceptor and the council of ministers have asked your welfare and they want to see you 
urgently there in Ayodhya. Don’t tell them about the exile of Ram and death of the king. 
Take some royal gifts, i.e., silk and ornaments to be handed over to them and the king 
there.” 

Those messengers quickly got ready and moved on fast footed horses towards the city 
of Rajgriha. On way touching Malini river they crossed the mountainous passes of 
Apartala and Pralamab. They crossed the Ganga at Hastinapur (could be other than today’s 
city known by this name). Passing though Kuru Jangal they reached Panchal. On way they 
saw several lakes, rivers and water bodies. Passing Sardanda river carrying crystal clear 
water, they came across the coastal tree “ Satyopayachan ” which fulfils one’s desires. 
They gave a round of the tree as a mark of honour and saluting the tree with respect 
moved further. They passed through the city of Kulingam, and after that they passed a 
village known as Abhikala. They crossed the river Ikshumati which flew had its genesis 
in the mountain of Bodhibhavan attached with the family of Dasarath and his forefathers. 
Meeting Brahmins taking water from their palms, they crossed Bahilka terriotory and its 
mountain Sudama. 

On way they happened to visit Vishnu Pad, Vipasa river, and Salmali trees. They also 
saw the region inhabited by lions, tigers, elephants, and deer. The terrain was marked 
by several lakes and water bodies. By night, they finally arrived at the Giribraj city of 
Bharat. 

2-69 Bharat had horrible dream (21 / 2725) 

The same night when messengers entered the city, Bharat had scores of bad dreams, 
“Saw father anointed with oil, tumbling down from a mountain top, plunged into a pond 
filled with cow dung. He was drinking oil from the cups made of jointed palms. He was 
then taken in south direction in a chariot driven by asses. He was wearing red garland 
and a woman was driving his chariot.” 

When he told about the dream to his friends they tried to entertain him in various ways 
with an aim to divert his attention from the horrible dream. But Bharat didn’t look 
cheerful. His attention was riveted on dream and he apprehended the misfortune, “End 
of his father, or his own , or end of Lakshaman.” 


Page 31 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-70 Bharat departed for Ayodhya (30 / 2755) 

The messengers met the king kekeya , and prince Yudhajit. Paying their respects and 
salutations they met Bharat and passing over the royal gifts they had carried from 
Ayodhya, spoke, “ O, prince! The royal priest and ministers have enquired about your 
welfare and have expressed their wish to see you urgently in Ayodhya.” 

Bharat enquired, “ How is father? How are Ram and Lakshaman ? How is kind mother 
Kauslya ? Tell me about mother Sumitra. How is my mother Kaikeyi who is always in 
wrath suffering from her ego of intelligence and beauty ? “ 

The messengers replied in positive and advised him to make his chariot ready to depart. 
Bharat handed over those gifts to his maternal grandfather and uncle. He also gifted the 
messengers fabulously. 

Bharat sought the permission of the king mentioning the message from Ayodhya. The 
king of Kekeya appreciating his lineage and worthiness of his valiant brothers and father 
permitted him to depart. As a mark of affection and blessings Yudhajit and Aswapati 
smelt his head. 

While departing his maternal grandfather (Aswajit), and maternal uncle Yudhajit gave 
him precious gifts of two thousand gold coins, sixteen thousand horses, elephants of 
airavat breed born in Indrasira mountains, swift chariots drawn by mules, and horses. 
The gifts to Bharat included varieties of silk, woolen cloths etc. 

Riding the chariot and accompanied by entourage of attendants from Kekaya desh 
Bharat and Shatrughn departed for Ayodhya. 


2-71 Bharat on way to Ayodhya ( 47 / 2802) 

The places which Bharat passed through are: Sudam river, Ahlidini river flowing 
eastward, Shatradru river at Eledhana village, region of Apraparpata, hilly terrain of 
Akurvati, villages of Agneyam and Salyakartan, Shilvaha river, the forest of Chitrarath, 
confluence of Sarswati and Ganga, forest of Bharund on the north side of Veermatsya 
region, fast flowing kulinga river surrounded by ahaldini mountain range. When they 
crossed Yamuna river they stopped and took rest there. They crossed the Ganga at 
Pragvat, and then crossed river Kutkosthika. Further on his journey he passed through: 
village Jambuprasth on southern part of Toran, village Varutha, taking rest there further 
passed through Ujjihana where kadamb trees were in abundance. 

He yoked fast horses and leaving behind the army, he passed though Uttamika river 
near Sarvathirtha village, Kutika river near Hastaprashthak, Kapivati river near Lohitya 
village, Sthanumati river at Ekasala village, Gomati river at Vinata village, taking rest in 
sal trees grove near Kalinga city moved ahead. 

Driving through night he quickly came to see Ayodhya established by Manu. From a 
distance he didn’t see the previously experienced jubilation around the city parks and 
groves. He entered the Vaijayant gate and was given royal customary salutation. 
Thereafter he missed the incense and sandal fragrance in the city. The deities in the 
temples were found unattended. The tree had fallen trees. The floors of the place royal 
horses used to wait were not cleaned. People around had a pale face. No business 
activities seen in the city area. 


Page 32 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


Seeing the desolated Ayodhya, having great fear in his mind he entered the royal 
palace of the king. 

2-72 Kaikeyi broke the news of death of the king ( 54 / 2856) 

When Bharat didn’t find the king in his palace he entered his mother’s chamber. He 
touched the feet of his mother and she blessing him by smelling his head, enquired 
about his journey and about her father and brother in Kekaya. Bharat replied, “ I reached 
here in seven days. The entourage with me carrying the fabulous gifts are behind me. I 
came swiftly considering the king either is going to anoint Ram as crown prince or hold 
any sacred sacrifice. Tell me where is father ? 

Hearing his keen query she replied, “You glorious father who has credit of great 
performances has taken the path of heavenly abode.” Hearing this Bharat fell like a tree. 
He lamented loudly for the king’s demise. Bharat praised the luck of Ram who would 
have performed the last rites of father. He mentioned, “ Ram being elder and righteous is 
like my father. Announce my arrival to him.” 

He asked, “What were the last words of the king?” Kaikeyi mentioned, while dying he 
uttered, “ Hey Ram, Lakshaman and Sita.” His second utterance was, “Those would be 
fortunate who would see Ram coming back from forest.” 

The second statement made Bharat fearful and scared. He asked, “Why Ram with 
Lakshaman and Sita is in forest?” Kaikeyi broke the news, “ The king had made 
preparations for crowning Ram as prince. I claimed my two boons: One, crown for you, 
and two, exile for Ram. Under the grief of exiling Ram to forest the king ended his life. 
You need not worry about that. Go and meet Vashishath, and after doing the rites of the 
king, get yourself crowned as prince.” 

2-73 Bharat rejected the crown ( 28 / 2884) 

Bharat lost his cool and burst on his mother, “ You are a sinner. You killed my valiant 
father and exiled my righteous Ram to forest. My simple father didn’t know that in you he 
was embracing a fire. You have disgraced the family. You are not aware of the primary 
tradition of the Iksahavaku house. The elder has always been crowned king and the 
younger ones are to serve the elder. Ram always respected you like his own mother 
Kauslya. You always received affection of younger sister from Kauslya. You are greedy 
and have ruined the entire royal structure. I would have disowned you as mother, had 
Ram not considered you as mother.” 

Bharat continued, “ I am firm and would now go to forest to bring back Ram and crown 
his as king. I would serve him as his servant." 

2-74 Bharat denounced his mother ( 36 / 2920) 

Bharat continued, “I won’t speak to you. You are a sinner. Go to hell, and you would 
never get a seat in heaven where the king has gone.” 

Denouncing her acts he cited one instance, “ The celestial cow, Kamdhenu possessed 
by Vashishath could see once how her sons were being tortured on earth to plow land in 


Page 33 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


scorching sun. Tear drops fell from her eyes and they fell on the body of Indr who was 
roaming around in the lower domain. 

He could identify the tears of the celestial cow, Kamdhenu. Coming to her, he asked, “ 
What made you weep mother? Do we face any calamity ?” The cow replied, “ No, the 
leader to Gods ! I am grieved with the condition of my sons being forced to work in 
scorching sun over earth.” Indr could realize the pain of a mother for son. 

Bharat mentioned, “ Kamdhenu has hundreds of offspring, where as Kauslya has a lone 
son. Her pitiable condition compared to Kamdhenu could be several times more severe.” 
Bharat continued, “ You need to end your life immediately either by taking poison or 
squeezing a rope around your throat. I can’t show my face to the citizens.” 

With these words, Bharat denounced her and he fell on the ground fainted. 

2-75 Bharat met Kausalya (65 / 2985) 

When he regained his senses, he found himself amidst ministers and Kaikeyi. 
Reproaching her again he spoke, “ I have never come to know of her evil design for my 
crown, nor do I know the banishment of Ram." After asserting his stand, he moved with 
Shatrughn to see Kauslya. In the meanwhile Kausalya hearing his voice, moved to see 
Bharat along with Sumitra. On way Kauslya fell fainted, and Bharat came close to her. 
When she regained her senses, she spoke, “ Bharat ! Your mother has arranged crown 
for you. Now you need to enjoy this and my son would remain in exile. I request you to 
send me to exile to my son who has divine mark of Hirnyagarbha 3 golden 

navel 2-75-13). If nobody takes me there, with Brahmins, I would carry the sacred fire of 
this house and proceed to forest to be with my son.” 

Having heard the harsh words of Kauslya, Bharat tried to convince her that he didn’t 
have any knowledge what her mother had designed for him and exile for Ram. He swore 
by a series of utterances, “If I knew his exile, let my wife have no issue. If I knew his 
exile let me turn a beggar with a bowl in my hand. Like this he invited several curses 
against himself.” 

Kauslya was convinced with his ignorance about what Kaikeyi had done for him. She 
dragged him in his laps and wept bitterly. Bharat also ran into swoons several times and 
thus the day ended and night set in. 

2-76 Bharat performed the last rites (23 / 3008) 

Next day Vashishath consoled Bharat,” My blessing be with you. You have lamented 
enough. Now it is time to perform the last rites of the king with due honour.” Obeying the 
guru’s command, Bharat moved immediately and took out the body of the king immersed 
in oil. He began weeping seeing the face of the king, “ What purpose it served by 
sending Ram, Lakshaman and Sita to forest ? Your absence from this kingdom is like 
the night without moon.” While he was lamenting uttering several instances, Vashishath 
reminded him again to get involved in appropriate rites. 

Bharat obeyed and followed what the priests guided him to do. The king’s body was 
carried in a decorated palanquin which was preceded by throwing loads of precious 


33 This proves the supreme divinity of Ram which Kauslya knew and divulged on this occasion. 


Page 34 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


cloths and jewels. The incense of sandal permeated the air. The priests recited relevant 
vedic texts. 

Kauslya and other queens gave rounds of the king body and riding the carriages they 
arrived at Saryu where final cremation was performed. They came back from there after 
offering homage of water to the king. They spent ten difficult days in observing the rites 
and taking bare floor for sleeping. 

2-77 Twelfth and thirteenth day of rites ( 26 / 3034) 

On twelfth day on performance of religious rituals of offering pind (oblation of rice balls) 
to three preceding generations, precious gifts were given to Brahmins. The gifts included 
cloths, jewels, cows, houses, maids, servants etc. Bharat liberally offered the valuables 
to priests, poor and Brahmins. 

On thirteenth day while picking up bones from the cremation place of the deceased to be 
finally flown in the water of Saryu, Bharat and Shatrughn became emotional. They wept 
bitterly remembering the love father had bestowed upon them. They recalled those days 
and the current state in which he left the world while Ram was in exile. While Bharat and 
Shatrughn rolled over cremation ground, Vashishath consoled Bharat, “Hunger and 
thirst, birth and death, pain and pleasure are three eternal facts which everybody has to 
bear in this world.” Sumantr consoled Shatrughn and reminded him about universality of 
life and death. The ministers helped in huddling back two brothers to palace. 

2-78 Shatrughn reflected on Lakshaman (26 / 3060) 

While Bharat and Shatrughn were together, Shatrughn spoke to Bharat, “I am surprised 
how Ram who is the ultimate destination of all beings (2-78-2) has been sent to forest , 
even if Lakshaman was here. He should have restrained the king in the beginning itself. 


*T TR: TfTcf JTRvT: 15RT 5RTTTR: TRJII 

While they were reflecting on the turn of events, the guards saw Kubja coming fully 
dressed with loads of jewels and precious cloths. She had smear of sandal paste over 
her body. Her dressing up with varieties of jewels looked as if a female monkey has tied 
herself with ropes. They caught hold of her and handed over to Shatrughn mentioning 
she was the root cause of the developments. 

Shatrughn holding her firmly dragged violently over the ground, and in this process some 
of her jewels had scattered here and there. Her companions fled away sensing the 
wrath of Shatrughn. Kaikeyi rushed to Bharat for seeking help to liberate Kubja. Bharat 
advised Shatrughn, “ Don’t anything with a woman. She is always pardonable. Had Ram 
not felt otherwise I would have killed the greatest sinner Kaikeyi first. I am afraid he will 
not approve our conduct.” 

When Shatrughn released her she ran to Kaikeyi and got consolation from her. 

2-79 Bharat was offered throne ( 17 / 3077) 

In the morning of the fourteenth day, the council of ministers and priests requested 
Bharat to accept the crown and rule the state. They intimated him about the preparations 
made to crown him as the king. Bharat made a round of the auspicious items brought for 


Page 35 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


his coronation and with folded hands submitted, “The king is now no more. The inheritor 
of the crown is in forest. I would go with all these auspicious items to forest and anoint 
him the king at the earliest there. He will comeback as king and I would remain in forest 
for the assigned term of exile. I advise to take the full contingent of troops to forest in his 
honour of coronation. Let path be made even for the convenient movement to the 
forest." 

The statement of Bharat gave a live encouragement to the ministers and elders. They 
appreciated his idea and began the preparations for the forest. 


2-80 Highways cleared ( 22 / 3099) 

As desired by Bharat skilled craftsmen, artisans and planners were deployed to clear the 
track for movement to forest. They began their work with full devotion and took first the 
removal of unsuitable materials from the pathway. The creepers, loose soil, and 
inconvenient rocks were removed. The depressions were filled with suitable materials. 
Proper arrangement of water supply was made at convenient locations by the side of the 
pathway, with the provision of adequate number of wells. 

Tents for stay of Bharat were erected in auspicious period. They were fully decorated to 
reflect the perfect royalty. Arrangements for supply of varieties of fruits were also made. 

2-81 Assembly hall (16 / 3115) 

It was the preceding night of nandimukha shradh. As per royal custom, bards and 
musicians began playing their instruments. This quiet palatial premises was resonated 
with varieties of musical notes. This aggravated Bharat’s sorrow and he asked 
Shatrughn to stop them. 

Later he reflected with Shatrughn, “Because of misdeeds of Kaikeyi this kingdom has 
become rudderless. The inheritor is banished and the king has left for heavenly abode. I 
can’t bear such things. 

Meanwhile Vashishath arrived in the royal assembly hall and occupying the presedential 
seat asked to invite the Brahmins, ministers, Bharat and Shatrughn and elders. 
Immediately the city became alive with the movement of chariots and horses of the 
invitees coming to attend the assembly meeting. When Bharat arrived he was given due 
honour as was given to Dasarath. 

2-82 Bharat pledged to bring back Ram (32 / 3147) 

When the assembly was full of the participants represented by elite, scholars and 
Brahmins and respectable citizens, Vashishath addressed Bharat, “The king Dasarath 
has left back the royal legacy full of riches and well disciplined stable state. The enemies 
have already been destroyed. This is a prosperous state, and you need to accept the 
kingship immediately.” 

Bharat expressed his feelings, “I can’t rob the inheritance. It is the custom of this royal 
house from Dilip to Nahush that elder has the right of inheritance. Ram, the righteous 
eldest son of the king is in forest to honour the king’s words. I pledge to take him back to 
the throne of this kingdom. He is the only inheritor of this crown. I have made the 
arrangements for movement in advance to set the path to forest in order so that troops 


Page 36 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


could have convenient run. If I couldn’t be able to get him back, I would stay in forest as 
my respectful brother Lakshaman is doing.” 

Bharat indicated to Sumantr to ask the army chiefs and warriors to move for forest. Let 
all preparations for adequate number of chariots, horses and elephants be made ready 
to move. Sumantr happily made all arrangements and from every house of Brahmin, 
kshatriya, vaisya and shudr he got the response in favour of the proposal to move for 
the forest. 

2-83 Bharat on move ( 26 / 3173) 

Early morning the ministers, and priests had moved out before Bharat left Ayodhya. On 
day Bharat left on a chariot. With him nine thousand elephants, sixty thousand chariots 
and one hundred thousand horsed were on move. 

Mothers Kaikeyi, Sumitra, and Kausalya were going on separate chariots in a mood to 
get back Ram to Ayodhya. Citizens of Ayodhya were jubilant on their move to visit their 
beloved and affectionate Ram. Various categories of craftsmen related to potteries, 
carpentry, flower scents, jewelry, fine stone, ironsmith, tailors, and washers had joined 
the moving mass. Brahmins learned in scriptures were moving on bullock carts. 

When they reached Shringberpur the Ganga, flocked by chakra birds, offered a great 
visual delight. This place belongs to Guh, a great friend of Ram, who was chief of 
Nisahad tribe. Bharat advised them to stop for rest as troops were still behind. Taking 
the advantage of the opportunity, Bharat offered water homage in the Ganga to his 
deceased father. 

2-84 Guh got scared ( 18 / 3191) 

Seeing innumerable troops camping on the bank of the Ganga, Guh alerted his guards 
and men to guard the ferry line strictly. He noticed a large banner marked with kovidara 
tree flying a top Bharat’s chariot. He wondered, “ Bharat is here to seize us or kill us, or 
is he going to kill Ram and grab the kingdom of Ayodhya for ever. Let there be five 
hundred boats kept ready guarded by one hundred young musclemen. If Bharat is learnt 
to have good intention then only his army would be allowed to cross the Ganga." 

With a view to understand Bharat’s motive, Guh went to see him with gifts of honey, 
fruits, and fish. Having seen Guh coming Sumantr spoke to Bharat, “The man 
surrounded by thousand of people is Guh, the chief of Nishad and a great friend of Ram. 
He knows precisely where Ram is staying now.” Hearing Sumantr, Bharat became 
excited and advised him, “Introduce me to him immediately." 

Coming to Bharat Guh mentioned, “I am your subject, and my home is quite close. I pray 
you to grace our place with your presence. The troops need to take rest today and 
tomorrow they should cross the Ganga." 

2-85 Guh assured help ( 22 / 3213) 

Hearing Guh’s hospitable words, Bharat enquired which of the two routes would lead to 
the ashram of the sage Bharadwaj. Guh promptly spoke, “Our ferry men and me 
personally would accompany you to ensure a proper guidance. I have a doubt as to why 


Page 37 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


do you take such a large troop with you. Do you have any plan against Ram ? “ Bharat 
instantly picked up and expressed his pure intention of visiting Ram was to take him 
back to Ayodhya. Finding Bharat anguishly wailing, Guh was highly impressed and 
assured all help to him and praised his greatness, “No person on earth can measure 
your personality. You got the kingdom from your father without any effort and now you 
offer it back to Ram." 

Bharat with Shatrughn kept reflecting for long. His grief had slowly taken the proportion 
of a large unbearable mountain and he found himself crushed under that. He again met 
Guh with a stable mind. 

2-86 Guh narrated about Ram’s stay (25/ 3238) 

Guh narrated how Lakshaman, the gem of human being, had impressed him, “ It was 
night time. Ram was sleeping with Sita on ground. I offered Lakshaman a comfortable 
bed to take rest while his brother was also sleeping. Lakshaman ignoring my offer told 
me, “How can I sleep, when my elder brother with Sita is lying on blades of grass. I can’t 
do that. I am sure, father Dasarath, mother Kauslya and Sumitra would die soon. 
Sumiatra may survive because of Shatrughn, but there is hardly any chance for Kauslya. 
I appreciate the fate of Shatrughn who would perform their last rites.” Thus lamenting, in 
anguish, Lakshaman spent the whole night keeping a vigil over Ram. In the morning, 
both the brothers, using the milky glue of the banyan tree, made their hair matching to 
ascetics’ hair style. Thereafter, they were ferried across Gangs. Looking back on me 
they departed to forest.” 

2-87 Guh continued on Ram’s stay ( 24 / 3262) 

Hearing the narration of Guh, Bharat fell unconscious over ground. Shatrughn taking him 
in his arms, cried loudly which caused Kauslya and other mothers to huddle around 
Bharat. Kauslya was in tears but closely embaraced Bharat and spoke, “Son, you are 
our only hope now. How can you get so depressed ? Did you hear anything about Ram 
and Laskhamn in forest ? Get up my son, as we all look towards you for our support.” 
After sometime Bharat regained his normalcy and asked Guh to elaborate on Ram’s 
stay, “ Where did they lie? What did they eat ?” 

Guh mentioned, “ I had offered varieties of fruits 4 and drinks (2-87-14/15) but didn’t take 
any of them on the plea that he was not permitted to enjoy luxurious life style. In the 
dusk time all of them maintained silence and offered worship. Thereafter Lakskaman 
brought kush grass and prepared their bed under the Ingudi tree. Ram and Sita took 
water only brought by Lakshaman. Lakshaman also remained on the balance water. 
Thereafter, Lakshaman washed their feet and they slept on the kush bed. Lakshaman 
equipped himself with bow, arrows, and quiver on back maintained vigil walking at a 
distance from them. I also with my bow and arrows remained with Lakshaman. “ 


Nishad raj, Guha’s statement here confirms the roots and fruits being the food items of Ram (2-87-14/15), and not the 
meat and fish, as interpreted by some commentators at various places in Valmiki Ramayan. One given word in Sanskrit 
carries different connotations, and to understand that one has to adopt properly composed devotional mind set and 
matured linguistic knowledge. 


Page 38 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-88 Bharat vowed an ascetic life style (30 / 3292) 

Accompanied by his ministers Bharat visited the Ingudi tree where Ram had slept. He 
closely noticed the impressions of their body discernible from the profile of the kush bed. 
He could find out some silk threads stuck up with the grass which must had been of Sita. 
He appreciated the luck of Lakshaman who followed him in forest. He again expressed 
his resolve to get him back to throne with Lakshaman, and instead he accompanied by 
Shatrughn would remain in forest for the specified period of his exile. If he didn’t oblige 
him, he would follow his footsteps in forest until his stay." 

Bharat revealed his another resolve, “From now onwards I shall also remain in ascetics 
life style taking only fruits and roots wearing bark on the body.” 

2-89 Bharat crossed the Ganga ( 23 / 3315) 

The night passed away, and Bharat awaking Shatrughn spoke, “It is morning time, now 
get up and go to Guh who could help us in getting across the Ganga. Shatrughn getting 
up mentioned, “ I was not sleeping, rather I continued reflection on Ram.” They were 
thus engaged in talk that Guh appeared and spoke to Bharat, “On the bank of the sacred 
Ganga, you must had spent a pleasant night.” Bharat expressing obligation for his 
careful hospitability requested him to arrange the ferry to go across the Ganga. 

Guh rushed to his men and arranged five hundred boats in no time. People were 
conveniently taken to the other side. Vashishath and other royal priests had boarded the 
boats before Bharat, Shatrughn and royal mothers. The learned Brahmins leaving their 
bullock carts boarded the boats. Elephants guided by their pilots crossed the Ganga 
swimming as if winged mountains were steering through water. Some preferred to 
swim, and some used the rafts and earthen pots. Some of the sailors’ kinsmen of the 
boats after leaving the people on the other shore crossed back using toy rafts made of 
bamaboo. 

Having reached the other side of the Ganga, they moved to pryag, and in auspicious 
period of maitra muhurth (2-89-21) they reached the place of sage Bhardwaj. Leaving 
behind the troops, Bharat with Vashishath proceeded to see the holy sage Bhardwaj. 

2-90 Bharat at Bhardwaj ashram ( 24 / 3339) 

When the ashram was about one kosa away Bharat left the troops and entourage behind 
and with Vashishath he entered Bhardwaj ashram. Having seen, Vashishath, Bhardwaj 
came forward and greeted him with respect offering arghya. 

After receiving the salutation from Bharat he offered them fruits and water. Bharat was 
introduced as son of Dasarath. Bhardwaj enquired about the welfare of the state of 
Ayodhya, its people, its treasury etc. Vashishath attending to them to be well, enquired 
from Bhardwaj about the status of ashram for the sacred sacrifices, disciples, trees, 
birds etc. 

Having attended to Vashishath’s enquiry Bhardwaj spoke to Bharat, “Does your arrival 
here has got some administrative purpose. Ram, the virtuous one, along with his wife 
Sita, and brother Lakshaman, have been banished, on words of a woman to forest. May 
I know, whether you intend to do now any harm to them and possess the state forever.” 
These words of Bhardwaj shocked Bharat. He mentioned, “If the blessed sage of your 


Page 39 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


stature has this impression about me, I am dead and is of no worth.” With eyes full of 
tears Bharat submitted, “I am not a party to the episode. I had never been taken in 
confidence for that. I don’t support the action of Kaikeyi. I have come to take back Ram 
to Ayodhya and offer him the throne.” 

Bhardwaj consoled Bharat, “Although I knew your mind, my blunt and harsh enquiry is to 
enhance your image.” 

Bharat further requested the sage to help him in locating Ram. Bhardwaj mentioned, 
“Ram is now staying in Chitrakoot.” I would advise and like that you take rest here 
tonight and move to Ram tomorrow morning. 

2-91 Bhardwaj hospitality (84 / 3423) 

When Bharat greed to stay, the sage asked him to bring his army to the ashram and 
wondered as to why he left his army away from the ashram. Bharat politely submitted, 
“The elephants and horses would have caused damage to the ashram and therefore 
they were to stay away from here.” On the insistence of Bhardwaj he got the troops to 
ashram. 

In the meanwhile, Bhardwaj arriving at the fire place of the ashram sipped water (which 
is a resolving rite for ascetics) and invoked Viswakarma to attend the need of the people 
and the troops accompanying Bharat. He also invoked three gods in-charge of world 
{yam, varun, kuber ) and Indr to keep the guests happy. He wished rivers of all quarters 
be present here and they should provide all sorts of soft and sweet drinks to the guests. 
He invoked celestial musicians viswavasu, haha and huhu to attend the guests. The 
celestial dancers invited were ghrithachi, viswachi, mishra keshi, alambusha, nagdanta, 
hema, and hima. The celestial garden presided by kuber in the northern region of kuru to 
provide instant cloths, ornaments and fruits were invoked. Moon god the presiding deity 
of plants was invoked to provide all varieties of food, drink and fruits. 

All the gods thus invoked by him visited his place. Cool and scented breeze from malay 
swept the ashram. The cloud hovered with shower of flowers over the ashram. The 
troops got accommodation in duly leveled area spread over a measure of five yojan 
where emerald green carpets were laid. Varieties of trees bearing bilba, kapitha, amala , 
jack fruit and mango appeared in abundance. Horses and elephants got places covered 
with high arches. 

Palaces furnished fully appeared to facilitate comfortable stay of the people. Bharat 
entered with his ministers, priests and Brahmins to such a palace. He found a royal seat 
with umbrella. Going around in reverence, as if Ram had occupied that, he took a chavar 
and took a seat. Then arrived there twenty thousand female attendants from Brahma, 
another twenty thousand female attendants from Kuber. The celestial musicians narad, 
tumbur and gopa presented their programs before Bharat. The celestial dancers 
alambusha, mishrakeshi, pundrika, and vamana presented their dances. The flowers of 
celestial chitrarath grove were found present in the palace. The bilba tree tuned into a 
mridunga (drum beater), bibhitika tree used cymbals, peepal tree turned a dancer. Other 
trees viz., lilaka, tal (palm), tamal, deodara turned into entertaining form of hunch-backs. 
The trees Shimshupa, malati, malika, jathi, and jambu were also seen among the dancer 
groups. The dancers also ushered the people to take varieties of food and drinks 
available. 

The animals were served with varieties of fodder, honey coated cereals and water. 


Page 40 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


For each seven / eight persons, there were one charming feminine attendant, who 
provided all sorts of pastes, soaps, and oil for their bath. Those attendants also served 
them towels and wiped their moist body. The troops and people were so engrossed in 
comforts and provisions that they expressed their good-bye to Ayodhya as well as 
Dandak and at the same time glorified Bharat and Ram for the rare pleasure they 
derived from that stay. 

The night of gala and pleasure passed out like dream. It was all due to divine capability 
of the sage Bhardwaj. It is learnt that the trees, ponds, wells and water bodies had 
transformed with divine power into various facilities and provisions. 

2-92 Bharat took leave of Bhardwaj ( 39 / 3462) 

In the morning when the sage was performing fire oblations, Bharat with folded hands, 
sought leave to move out. Sage enquired about their stay comfort. Bharat replied 
positively, “we got rare relaxation and satisfaction.” 

Bharat enquired about the exact location of Ram. The sage mentioned, “About three 
and half yojan from here is Chitrakoot mountain, with Mandakini flowing to its north. 
Once you are at Mandikini, take either left and then south, or go south from there, you 
will find the shelter of Ram." 

Before leaving three mothers Kauslya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi came to offer salutation to 
the holy feet of the sage. When asked for introduction by the sage, Bharat introduced 
them one by one, “The one thin but resplendent like Aditi who gave birth to Upendra 
(Vaman), is Kausalya, the mother of Ram. Like karnika tree with pale creepers, on left of 
Kausalya is Sumitra mother of two illustrious brothers Lakshaman and Shatrughn. 
Kaikeyi, my mother, who couldn’t find her wishes fulfilled is the third one and she is root- 
cause of the misfortune.” 

Bhardwaj spoke, “Never worry about this and she should not be always accused. To me 
it seems the exile is for the benefit of sages, gods and demons and final outcome is 
going to be pleasant.” 

Bharat giving respectful round to the sage moved out seeking his blessings. With his 
movement in palanquin, began the movement of all the troops, and his accompanying 
entourage. The movement of the troops caused a great stir in the forest area along with 
a discernible cloud of dust from a distance. 

2-93 Bharat in search of Ram’s ashram (27 / 3489) 

As the people moved forward towards Chitrakoot, the forest got perceptibly stirred by the 
trampling caused by movement of elephants, horses and chariots. The wild animals 
deer, antelopes and birds, getting scared of the rare scene, were running here and 
there. The cloud of dust from horses’ hoofs was a rare scene but it was swiftly being 
taken away by wind causing no discomfort to the moving entourage. 

The passing natural scene was charming for its greenery and chirping of birds. The 
scattered groves of trees and springs had added to the natural and impressive beauty. 

Getting wearied of long travel, Bharat spoke to Vashishath, “As indicated by the sage 
Bhardwaj we appear to have reached our destination. Here is river mandakini, and the 
peak in the background must be of Chitrakoot." 


Page 41 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


Bharat then asked some of his troops to move around and find out the location of the 
ashram of our beloved righteous Ram. Soon they pointed out to a column of smoke 
rising from one of the peaks. Bharat asked others to wait there, and he accompanied by 
Sumantr and his spiritual preceptor Dhriti moved towards the landmark of the smoke. 

2-94 Ram and Sita engaged in watching Chitrakoot (27 / 3516) 

After staying for sometime in Chitrakoot, Ram got impressed by the natural beauty of 
place. He pointed out one by one to Sita, “ Look at the silver white place, flanked by red 
and blue spots. The trees are covered with delicious colorful fruits and berries. No 
quarter can be seen without varieties of fragrant flowers. The animals of all species are 
found to live here in friendly way. The cluster of trees and springs of water are the 
specific features of this place. This place looks like Alaka of Kuber and Amravati of Indr, 
two combined in one. By coming to this place I have forgotten all my worries. The stay at 
this place has given us two things simultaneously: reputation of honoring the father’s 
words, and rare experience of relaxation.” 

He further mentioned, “The Chitrakoot mountain appears to have blossomed out of the 
mother earth’s womb.” 

2-95 Ram described the scene of Mandakini to Sita (19 / 3535) 

Turning towards river mandakini Ram elaborated to Sita, “ See the colorful sands on the 
river banks. The varieties of birds have flocked on the expanding sands. Swans and 
other words don’t intend to leave the river shores. The monkeys are coming to enjoy 
cool and crystal water. The trees on the banks have shed leaves as if mounts of 
Chitrakoot have danced along the river shores. See how matted hair ascetics are 
bathing happily wearing barks and deer skin. The sages find rare pleasure, with raised 
arms, offering oblation to sun god from flowing stream of mandakini . I take chitrakoot 
idetical to Ayodhya. The sages and natural entities are the people, and mandakini is 
saryu. Staying here I never crave for Ayodhya. What a lovely place ! 

2-96 Bharat’s troops caught Ram’s attention ( 30 / 3565) 

Sita had felt hungry, and Ram gave her a piece of cooked root . 5 In the meantime he 
could notice the panic among the animals. Wild buffalo, deer and tigers were running in 
scare. He could soon realize the movement of large troops and rattle of chariots. Ram 
advised Lakshaman to find out the identity of the troops. 

Lakshaman climbing a sat tree shouted, “Get ready. Keep Sita to a safe place. Put out 
the fire and smoke from here. I could see the troops of Bharat hoisting kovidara tree 
banner over the chariot. He is here at our threshold to eliminate both of us. Today I 
would teach him and his mother the true lesson. Killing both of them I could quench fire 
of revenge lit in my heart for long time.” 

2-97 Lakshaman brought to reasons ( 31 / 3596) 

Ram could immediately realize the situation. He reproached Lakshaman, “ Don’t be fool 
and take Bharat motive otherwise. He is dear to me than my life. If he is here, it is most 


5 Some commentator has mistaken this as a meat piece. 


Page 42 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


appropriate of him. He could have been coming here in dissent to his mother to give me 
back my crown. If you are so desirous of kingdom, I would ask him to transfer that crown 
to you.” 

Hearing Ram, Lakshamn sensed the gravity of the situation and his blunder in assessing 
Bharat. He changed his mind and began, “To me it seems father Dasarath himself has 
come. He might come to take back Sita who had never been in such harsh condition. I 
could see the shtrunjaya elephant aged to our father, but the symbol of his royalty the 
white umbrella is missing.” 

Ram advised Lakshaman to climb down the tree. Lakshaman coming down stood by 
side of Ram. 

2-98 Anxious Bharat (13 / 3609) 

Bharat had become very anxious to see Ram at the earliest. He advised Shatrughn, and 
Sumantr to search around, and find out the righteous Ram. He himself also moved 
around on foot in his search. He expressed, “Lakshaman is really fortunate who got 
chance to serve him in forest. Sita has performed her natural duty to the husband. The 
forest of chitrakoot has got benefitted by his presence. I won’t find peace unless I see 
the royal crown over his head consecrated by sacred water.” 

2-99 Union of brothers (42 / 3651) 

Praying Vashishath to move with mothers, Bharat kept searching Ram. He saw the 
mountain and the river Mandakini as indicated by the sage Bhardwaj. He was sure to be 
at correct place. Looking around when he moved he found indications of Ram staying 
nearby. The tufts of kush grass were seen tied to the trees along the track. He could 
guess, “To indentify the right route, Lakshaman could have done that. This would have 
helped them during dark hours. 

Reflecting thus he was moving forward and his eyes fell on a hut made of leaves. He 
paced fast, and lo and behold!, he got the glimpse of Ram squatted on the ground right 
leg resting on the left knee. He saw Lakshman and Sita around him. His eyes were fixed 
on the charming glimpse of Ram, “An ascetic with matted hair, beaming face, lion like 
shoulders, wide open chest, long arms, cloud-hued body.” He became guilty conscious, 
“The one who had grown with royal facilities, but is now in an ascetic dress and style in 
forest. This has happened only because of me.” With eyes blind with tears and voice 
chocked, he could utter only, “ Arya (the noble one)” ,and fell short of his feet. 

Shatrughn following him, fell on Ram’s feet. Soon they were all embracing each other 
with tears drenching their shoulders. Their tears brought tears to the eyes of all the wild 
beings around them. Soon Sumantr and Guh saw them, as if sun and moon were in 
conjunction with Venus and Jupiter. 

2-100 Enquiry about the state (76 / 3727) 

Initially Ram was unable to recognize Bharat lying before him on ground. He had 
become lean and he was having matted hair and bark cloths. Picking him up, he smelt 
his head (as mark of affection), and taking him on his lap spoke, “Why did you come to 
forest, when father is alive? I have seen you after a long time but you have become lean. 
Is our valiant father well, or on his departure to heaven, you have come here ? Is the 
kingdom intact or in danger ? Do you respect the Brahmins and elders including our 


Page 43 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


family priest (Vashishath)? Do Brahmins assigned the duty of ritual oblation to fire keep 
you punctually informed ? Are mothers Kauslya and Sumitra well? How about the queen 
Kaikeyi? Do you respect the great archer Sudhanva who is well versed in using shafts 
with and without invoking mantra and is good in economics (political science 2-100-14)? 
I believe you must not be oversleeping, and in the later part of the night, must have been 
contemplating over the actions ahead. I also presume that you must have been taking 
counsel from the able ministers assigning duties to their abilities. I trust, your well 
thought out plans are not leaked before they materialize. You must have been paying 
the salary and wages to royal servants and ministers in time unless otherwise that 
makes them corrupt. The income of the state must have been more than expenses. You 
must have been using three independent spies to keep vigil on eighteen functionaries of 
your enemy states, and fifteen functionaries of your own state (2-100-36). You must not 
have been trapped by greedy Brahmins who plead quoting scriptures but are selfish. 
The great dynastic state is rich in irrigated cultivation, and a well settled city of Ayodhya, 
and you must have been careful to them. Agriculture and livestock rearing (2-100-47 / 
48), being very crucial for prosperity, must have been duly attended. Women must have 
been given due protection. The ministers must have been impartial in dealing with 
contention between a rich and a poor. Someone accused of misbehavior or 
misappropriation must not have been penalized in haste unless confirmed by the 
counsel of legal experts. You must have been polite, affectionate and liberal in charity to 
elders, children and physician. Your due attention must have been given to respect of 
Brahmins, gods, the groves at squares of the city ( chaitya ) (2-100-61), and the learned 
people. You must have been attentive to the balance of arth (possessing wealth), dharm 
(spiritual service), and kam (physical comfort) in the assigned hours of your daily life. 
There are fourteen don’ts for a king: atheism, speaking a lie, anger, unmindful state, 
delaying tendency, ignoring the wise, laziness, indulgence to sensual delight, solitary 
decision, consulting unqualified people, deferring the commencement of planned works, 
divulge plans before action, lack of auspicious actions and words, and rising to all 
enemies at one time. You must have been aware of ten evils, five crucial securities, four 
royal strategies, seven stately constituents, eight associates of anger (or variously eight 
development disciplines) (2-100-68/70), and other abiding royal duties." 

He further wished to confirm, “Bharat, you must have been toeing the great trend set by 
our renowned forefathers.” 

2-101 Bharat wished to crown Ram (26 / 3753) 

Both Ram and Lakshaman enquired from Bharat, “Why did you wear ascetics dress with 
matted hair, and why did you come to forest ?” Ram again embraced Bharat and 
repeated his excited query. Bharat with folded hands submitted, “The king couldn’t bear 
your separation and has departed to heavenly abode. Honouring the words of queen 
Kaikeyi he earned disrepute in the world. My mother Kaikeyi, now a widow couldn’t reap 
the fruits of kingdom sought for me. I am here to anoint you king which is due to you as 
per succession practice. Now you have to provide succor to the widow queens and the 
entire world.” 

Discarding the mantle of sovereignty, Ram spoke to Bharat, “It is our abiding duty to 
honour the command of father. We also have to be subservient to our mother. The king 
assigned two distinct functions to both of us. You have been assigned the crown, and for 
me living for fourteen years in Dandak forest has been his command. Both of us have to 
be true to his service, and let us strive to maintain his reputation.” 


Page 44 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-102 Bharat repeated his request ( 9 / 3762) 

Tearful Bharat again submitted, “The crown belongs to the eldest son. The family 
tradition does not allow to overrule this practice. You may not be aware, the king was so 
deeply hurt with your departure with Lakshaman and Sita that he couldn’t survive the 
shock. It is now most pertinent time for you to come to Ayodhya and protect the kingdom 
which belongs to you only.” 

He further mentioned, “I and Shatrughna had already offered water oblations to the soul 
of departed father. It is now your term to offer water to him. You had been most 
affectionate to him, and while dying he was fully immersed in your memory.” 


2-103 Mourning for father ( 49 / 3811) 

The grief of death of father gripped Ram so deeply that he fell with extended hands on 
ground. His brothers while raising consoled him. His wails carried his expression, 
“Ayodhya without the king is not worth visiting. Even if I complete the term of exile I 
would prefer to be away from Ayodhya. My father used to encourage me with sweet 
words, now who will do that for me.” Ram with eyes flowing tears wept loudly, “O, Sita! 
Your father-in-law is no more. O, Lakshaman ! you are now shorn of the affections of 
father. Bharat has brought this sorrowful news.” Sita was also weeping. After a while the 
brothers consoling Ram asked to move for offering water oblations. 

Soon the pulp of Ingudi tree was arranged for oblation. Ram putting new barks as the 
lower and upper garments, keeping Sita in front, Lakshaman on second postition, toed 
towards the Mandakini river from the rear. 

Sumantr holding the hand of Ram helped him in descending to the flowing stream. 
Facing south Ram offered palm-full of water in oblation to his father uttering, “O, father ! 
this water of respect oblation may reach you where you are with forefathers.” Ram then 
ascended to the bank of Mandakini and offered oblation containing pulp of Ingudi tree 
mixed with that of plum laid over a layer of kush (blade of special grass with pointed tips 
used for rituals) and mentioned, “Accept this offer of food. This is the food I take, and it is 
said, the food one takes is considered to be the best oblation to god. (2-103-30)” 

Thereafter he moved to the mountain of Chitrakoot towards his hermitage. Arriving at the 
hermitage, the Lord 6 of the universe (2-103-32), Ram embraced Bharat, and all the 
brothers began wailing loudly. The mourning was so loud and terrifying that all the wild 
animals: boars, elephants, tigers, deer and others were scared. They began leaving with 
commotion for another adjoining forest. The birds got scared too, and soon the sky was 
full with their flutters. 

The commotion got noticed by the troops accompanying Bharat halted away from the 
hermitage. They moved towards the hermitage. Some took horses to hasten the 
movement, some took chariot, where as the young and able ones took on foot. While 
moving they kept cursing Kaikeyi and Manthara for the state of affairs. When they 


6 This is a clear expression of supreme divinity of Ram, contrary to common saying that Valmiki had portrayed Ram as a 
dignified human being than as an incarnation of supreme spirit. 


Page 45 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


arrived on the hermitage, some were embraced by Ram, while some offered their 
respect to him from a distance. 

2-104 Mothers at the hermitage (32 / 3843) 

Anxious Vashishath, following the queens moved to the hermitage. On way Kasalya got 
a glimpse of the Mandakini river flowing in the eastern part of the forest of Chitrakoot. 
Imagining forest life of carrying water from the river to the hermitage she got gripped with 
grief. Thinking aloud she mentioned, “Lakshaman must have been carrying water from 
here for his righteous brother. Now he would be relieved of such duty (as she expected 
to take back Ram to Ayodhya)." Moving further she noticed the balls of Ingudi and plum 
over kush (with its pointed tips towards south). She could immediately realized, “Ram 
has offered that as oblation to his father. She was immersed in grief as the king was 
offered the forest food of Ram, Ingudi and plum. “How can a chakravarti monarch like 
Dasarath could be able to accept the wild food in oblation?”, tormented her mind further. 
Reflecting with remorse over the state of affairs she reached the hermitage and spotted 
the ascetic Ram with brothers. Her eyes were in tears. Ram came forward and holding 
her feet offered the salutation. All the queens were thus respected by Ram, and their 
hands wiped the dust from the shoulder and back of Ram. 

Tearful Lakshaman, following Ram, offered the salutation to the mothers. When Sita with 
tears in her eyes were holding their feet, cursing the destiny, they embraced her, “O, 
Sita! My beloved one, you are the daughter of king Janak, daughter-in-law of Dasarath, 
and wife of Ram, and you have been put to face such a tough forest life.” 

Ram moving forward held the feet of guru Vashishath. Offering him a seat, he sat by his 
side. All others occupied their seat accordingly. The august gathering had great 
expectation from Bharat whose presence was noticed as glowing sacrificial fire among 
his companions. 

2-105 Bharat prayed Ram again (46 / 3889) 

The mourning continued immersing people in deep grief for the full night. The dawn 
came and after attending the normal ritual at Mandakini they all gathered at Ram’s 
place. Breaking the silence, Bharat in remorseful voice submitted to Ram, “You are great 
that you obliged my mother by offering the crown to me. Now I return the same to you. 
Kindly accept it and protect us from this calamity.” 

Having heard grieved Bharat, Ram consoled him mentioning, “The journey of life in this 
mundane world is not under one’s own control. One can’t get what he desires. The cycle 
of life and death is unending. People keep on gathering and disbursing. Union and 
separation, rise and fall are inevitable to happen. One’s own wife and offspring come 
together in a given span of life like coming together of logs floating over sea waves, as 
they are again separated by the surfing water. Life is getting shorter moment by 
moment. Either stay at home or be on journey, the life is incrementally reducing. The 
end of life (called death) walks with us as we walk, it sits with us as we sit, and one day 
at the appointed moment the inevitable happens, i.e. , death ends our life. One should 
care about oneself and not about others. Our life is like flowing water, similar to passing 
of days and nights, and never returns the same way. The world is a dynamic caravan; 
even if one is stationed on wayside, he is bound to follow the caravan subsequently. We 
all are destined to follow the departure route of forefathers. One enjoys the day break, 


Page 46 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


the onset of new season, but the continuing aging get closer and closer to the end 
(death). Our father has reached heaven by dint of his sacrifices in life. Discarding his 
mortal remains, he now freely walks in the supreme domain 7 of utmost bliss (2-105-37). 
The life in current state has to be rejoiced and celebrated and not to be grieved for 
inevitable. You need not lament any more over father’s death. Get back to the city of 
Ayodhya and follow his command of looking after the state. I shall follow his command 
to remain in forest until the assigned term comes to its close." 


2-106 Bharat pleaded in vain ( 35 / 3924) 

Hearing the resolve of Ram, Bharat again spoke to him, “You are steadfast in sorrow 
and joy. I am younger to you in all respects. My mother’s sin can’t be reversed. Father is 
also being blamed for yielding to a woman, though he fulfilled his commitment to Kaikeyi. 
I had never been informed about all these. Now you alone can reverse the blemishes of 
the family and protect the state. Guru Vashishath is here, and right now the auspicious 
crowing can be solemnized. Kindly accept the crown. If you reject this offer and our 
prayer, I shall follow you in Dandak forest.” 

Ram was firm on his resolve. The people accompanying Bharat were distressed when 
Ram rejected his offer. 

2-107 Ram’s firmness ( 19 / 3943) 

Ram applauded Bharat for his noble thought, and mentioned, “Our duty is to obey the 
king’s command and make the queen Kaikeyi happy who wanted to see you on the 
throne. When Kaikeyi was married to Dasarath, the king pledged the kingdom to her as 
a marriage gift (2-107-3). Later, pleased by the courageous assistance of Kaikeyi in the 
conflict of gods and demons he granted two boons. Under those boons you got the 
throne of Ayodhya and I was given Danadak forest. I sincerely advise you to abide by 
the righteousness and rule over the state of Ayodhya, while I would be a ruler of wild 
beings in Dandak forest.” 

Ram further quoted from scriptures, “Long back a king named Gaya had performed 
sacrifices in honour of his ancestors at Gaya (2-107-11). The king Gaya had then 
mentioned, “ A true putra (son) is the one who provides tran (protection) to ancestors 
against hell named put. Among several pious and religious sons, at least one having 
intense affection to the parents, comes to Gaya for offering sacrifice to secure liberation 
to the ancestors.” Now you need to follow this and save the father from hell by remaining 
firm and true to his commands to us. Under this command you go with Shatrughn to 
Ayodhya and I with Lakshaman and Sita shall proceed into Dandak forest." 


2-108 Jabali pleaded for crown (18 / 3961) 

Jabali was a learned Brahmin from Ayodhya. He pleaded to Ram to accept the crown 
and enjoy the state of Ayodhay, “In this world no one is related to anybody. Every 


7 This indicates that a finite soul (jeev) can't transform into an infinite self ( Ishwar ). At the most, it can get closer to the 
infinite spirit and enjoy the state of blessedness. 


Page 47 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


individual is an entity. Father and mother are temporary stoppage to a wander finding a 
village at night. In the morning he leaves the village and continues the journey. Likewise, 
your relation to Dasarath has ended, and as advised by Bharat accept the crown. He 
pleaded to prove the futility of relation and therefore a commitment to futile relation does 
not mean anything. What is unseen in other world, should not be believed, rather what is 
present in this world should be honoured. Can sacrificial food offered to a dead reach 
him ? It is doubtful. If someone is travelling, then food offered in his name as a sacrificial 
action away from him, should have nourished him, but it is not the case. Trust the 
present and forget the myth beyond this world. It is time to accept the crown and honour 
the offer of Bharat." 

2-109 Ram refuted Jabali (39 / 4000) 

Hearing the words of Jabali, the learned Brahmin, Ram spoke, “I believe in truth. For a 
truthful person everything is attainable by its true following. In fact, Truth is god and it is 
the basis of all scriptures, austerities, sacrifices and religious practices. My father 
observed truthfulness to queen Kaikeyi. I vowed to keep his words. Now how can I deny 
that truth and get back to Ayodhya ! I can’t do that. I would stay in forest to honour the 
truthfulness of my father.” 

Ram further mentioned, “All sacrifices and oblations have been offered earlier and 
continued now have been without any expectation either in this world or in the next. This 
is what Brahmins and Vedas speak to us.” 

Hearing the firm refutation of Ram, Jabali mentioned, “My earlier spoken advice was to 
take you back to Ayodhya. I do follow Vedas, and never advise to violate that.” 

2-110 Vashishath’s advice ( 36 / 4036) 

Hearing the discourses between Jabali and Ram, Vashishath picked up the thread, “ 
Jabali knows this world and the other world fully well. Let me briefly cover the genesis of 
creation. Initially it was water all around. In water took place the formation of earth. 
There appeared Brahma as a self born creation. Narayan assuming the form of a boar 
( varah ) provided stability and safe space to earth to sustain the future creation. Brahma 
created Marichi, who created Kashyap. From Kashyap was created Sun. Manu was 
created from Sun. From Manu came Ikshavaku, and he got from Manu the entire earth 
very prosperous and fertile. He became the first king of Ayodhya. The successive family 
tree from Ikshavaku is: Kukshi, Vikushi, Ban, Anarnya, Prithu, Trishanku (who rose alive 
to heaven adhering to truth), Dhundhumar, Yuvnashva, Mandhata, Susandhi, 
Dhruvasandhi (and his brother was Prsenjit). 

From Dhrvasandhi was born Bharat, and he got his son Asit. The enemies of Asit were 
Haihaya, Taljangha, and Sashibindava who drove Asit out of the royal possession. Asit 
became a sage staying in mountains. His two wives were pregnant. One wife, with 
jealousy gave poison to other co-wife (Kalindi). Kalindi once went to forest where she 
met the sage Chyavan (of Bhrigu race). The sage blessed her to be mother of a valiant 
son who would redeem the royal dignity. Subsequently she gave birth to a shining son 
with charm of a lotus flower. He was born with poison ( r + RT ), so he was called Sagar. 
He caused the digging up earth, and his son was Asamanj who was banished by him for 
his notorious terrible activity. 


Page 48 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


Ansuman was son of Asamanj, who was blessed with a son called Dilip. Dilip’s son, was 
Bhagirath, who became father of Kakutastha (usually used to address the nobility of the 
family). From Kakutastha was born Raghu whose name is also used popularly to 
address the dignified personality of this race as Raghav. From him came Pravridha, who 
was variously called Purushadak, Kalmashpad, and Saudas. His son was Shankhan 
who was killed while fighting enemies. His son was Sudarshan and the further lineage is 
Agnivarna, Shighrag, Maru, Prashushruv, Ambrish, Nahush, and Nabhag. Two sons: Aja 
and Suvrat were born to Nabhag. From Aja was born Dasarath. 

Vashishath continued, “Ram, you being the eldest son of Dasarath, has the duty to 
protect the prosperous heritage of your father. In raghuvansh, by tradition, the eldest son 
has been the king. You need to observe the glorious tradition.” 


2-111 Ram firm on forest life (32 / 4068) 

Vashishath mentioned, “One has got three mentors: father, mother and preceptor. I 
being the preceptor of your family, including your father and you, I would never advise 
you to violate the path of virtue. What Bharat has said has merit, and you need to accept 
his proposal. You would be serving the people, who came accompanying Bharat. You 
would discharge truthful duty to aging mother as well." 

Hearing Vashishath, Ram submitted, “I have a vow to honour my father’s words to 
queen Kaikeyi.” 

Realizing the firm resolve of Ram, Bharat looked to Sumantr and advised him, “Please 
arrange to bring kush grass, and lay it here. I would now lie down before Ram’s 
hermitage on fast unto death.” While Sumantr looked to Ram, Bharat himself collected 
the kush grass and spread over there. Ram interfered his actions and spoke to him, 
“Such action suits to a Brahmin, but not to a kshatriya. Bharat, get up and proceed to 
Ayodhya to honour the father’s words.” 

Helpless Bharat looked towards the people accompanying him to urge Ram to get back 
to Ayodhya. Those people had by now understood the firmness of Ram and they 
consoled Bharat, “Ram is a righteous person and is of firm resolve. He won’t oblige you 
as he is committed to honour the words of his father.” 

Bharat lost the hope of help from his people. On Ram’s initiative he rose and touching 
water he again proposed firmly, “Fine, to honour the father’s words, one of us has to be 
in forest, and it is me who would undertake the term of exile on behalf of Ram. Let Ram 
give me this responsibility.” 

Ram didn’t agree to his proposal and mentioned, “It is immutable. The words of the king 
had been very clear: crown to Bharat, and exile to me. I assure you to get back after the 
term of exile, and take over the responsibility of crown to be duly assisted by you in the 
state activities.” 

2-112 Bharat left with paduka ( 31 / 4099) 

While Bharat and Ram were busy in discourses, great sages, sidhha, and gandharva 
(celestial beings) had gathered both visible and invisible state. Their concern was the 


Page 49 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


early end of Ravan (2-112-4) and therefore they addressed Bharat, “Both of you are 
virtuous and worthy sons of Dasarath. Ram is right in his commitment to honor the 
words of his father. It is better for you to take care of Ayodhya as enjoined by your 
father.” Bharat had no option, and he lying on Ram’s feet offered to prayer, “I won’t be 
able to rule such a vast and great royal state. I need due support from you. Kindly place 
your both lotus feet over this pair of wooden paduka which will guide me as a care taker 
of the state." 

He also mentioned with full emotion, “I also like to put these words to you that if you 
don’t get back to Ayodhya on the very following day of the end of fourteen years, I would 
enter into fire forever.” 

Ram obliged Bharat by touching the paduka with his feet and bade a farewell to Bharat 
and Shatrughn embracing close to his chest, and mentioned, “Never get angry to mother 
Kaikeyi. I take swear from you in the name of Lakshaman and Sita." Bharat giving 
rounds to Ram, with his paduka over his head, left for Ayodhya. 

He also bade farewell to all the people of Ayodhya accompanying Bharat. Ram couldn’t 
speak words of farewell to mothers, nor they could utter any words to him, and seeing 
each other with tearful eyes they departed. Ram offering them salutations entered his 
hermitage with tears in his eyes.” 

2-113 Salutations to Bhardwaj ( 24 / 4123) 

The sages Vashishath, Jabali and others left preceding Bharat. Both the brothers, 
Bharat and Shatrughn mounting the chariot left from the eastern side of Mandakini giving 
a round of the Chitrakoot mountain. Soon they arrived at the hermitage of maharshi 
Bhardwaj. When they went to offer their salutation to the holy feet of the sage, he asked, 
“Could you see Ram ?” Bharat replying in affirmative mentioned, “He has firm resolve to 
honour the words of the father Dasarath. I with guru Vashishath tried to persuade him 
but he didn’t relent. On the instance of guru Vashishath, when I put a pair of paduka for 
touch of his holy feet, he did oblige me, and now I am carrying the holy paduka as a 
symbol of his royal regency.” 

Bhardwaj applauded the righteousness of Bharat and gave credits to the worthy king 
Dasarath who had been fortunate in getting such great sons. Taking the permission of 
the sage Bhardwaj to leave, Bharat left crossing Yamuna, and soon he crossed the river 
Canga. When he saw towards Ayodhya from Shirngberpur, he was again gripped by the 
remorseful thought, “The city of Ayodhya appears desolate from here as it is devoid of 
the presence of affectionate father and righteous brother.” 

2-114 Desolate Ayodhya ( 29 / 4152) 

When his chariot moved towards Ayodhya, he found the city, “as rohini afflicted by rahu ; 
an extinguished sacrificial fire left with ash; flower creeper hosting bees attacked by 
forest fire; cats and owls walking freely; squares of the roads devoid of fragrance of 
incense and sandal and host of other inauspicious signs.” 

Addressing his charioteer, he continued mentioning about all the inauspicious look of 
the city. 

When he entered his father’s chamber, he felt as if he was in a lion’s cave deserted by 
the mighty lion. 


Page 50 of 53 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


2-115 Bharat at Nandigram (27 / 4179) 

Having lodged back his mothers at Ayodhya, Bharat submitted to guru Vashishath, “ I 
would not get peace, until I leave Ayodhya, and continue staying at the village 
Nandigram.” His proposal got soon met the consent of Vashishath and royal ministers. 
Bharat riding a chariot with paduka in his possession arrived at Nandigram. He was 
joined by his ministers and Brahmins along with guru Vashishath. He enthroned the 
paduka and offered all royal respect of umbrella and fanning chawar to the paduka. 

He himself assumed the garb of an ascetic with matted hair and barks over the body. He 
remained at Nadndigram counting the days of return of Ram. He used to enjoy the 
imagination of welcoming return of Ram and crowning him over the royal throne. 
Whatever small or big gifts he received, he first offered them to the holy paduka, and 
thus he continued functioning as the regent representative of Ram. 

2-116 Sages alarmed Ram ( 26 / 4205) 

After the departure of Bharat to Ayodhya, Ram noticed flutter among the sages at 
Chitrakoot. He enquired one of them, who appeared to be elder among them, “Do you 
feel any fault in my behavior, or Lakshaman had been disrespectful to the sages here ? 
Has Sita missed the courteous response to you? I notice something is wrong here 
which has caused discomfort to the sages." 

The sage mentioned the cause of their anxiety, “After your arrival here, the demons lead 
by Khar had become rough to all sages over entire Jansthan. They destroy our sacrificial 
items for oblation to fire. Often the fire is extinguished by them pouring water in the 
oblation squares. They also defile our place and our body by pouring objectionable 
items. Very freely they manifest their ugly and dreadful forms to scare us. Under such 
situation we have decided to desert this place and shift to another forest where fruits and 
roots are adequate as well. We also advise you to leave with us, as you have to be 
careful to the safety of Sita too.” 

Ram didn’t leave with them, and after bidding farewell to them came back to his 
hermitage. 

2-117 Arrival at Atri’s ashram (29 / 4234) 

After the exodus of sages, Ram kept reflecting on the events, “I often get nostalgic here. 
This could have been contributed by the recent visit of Bharat and mothers to this place. 
The spoils left by the troops further divert my attention to Ayodhya." Thus Ram decided 
to quit the place and in course of his movement southward he located the hermitage 
inhabited by Atri with his ascetic wife Ansuya. 

When they saluted the sage Atri, he greeted with warmth of a father meeting the sons. 
Addressing his wife, Ansuya, he spoke, “Greet the daughter of Videha, Janak who is at 
our hermitage.” He then turned towards Ram and introduced Ansuya to them, “She is a 
great ascetic who protected this land from a decade long severe drought. All fruits and 
roots had dried up, but from her ascetic potential she created a perennial water source 
here. The greeneries were restored yielding enough fruits and roots. Previously she had 
been engaged for ten thousand years in deep and tough meditation and that has added 
immense potential to her. From her spiritual power she once transformed ten nights into 
one.” He advised Sita to get closer to her who is although very aged but free from anger. 


Page 51 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


On the initiative of Ram, Sita went close to Ansuya, who was so aged that her limbs 
were shaking like leaves of a banana plant. When Sita offered respectful salutation to 
her, introducing herself by uttering her own name, and enquiring about her welfare, 
Ansuya greeted her with deep affection. 

Ansuya spoke to Sita, “Your conduct is appreciable that deserting the royal comfort you 
followed your husband in forest. For a married woman, the husband is all in all, superior 
to any of the gods. Wife has to obey faithfully her husband without finding any fault in his 
conduct. Even if the husband is poor and lacks in taking care of wife, he is venerable for 
wife. “ 

2-118 Ansuya blessed Sita (54 / 4288) 

Welcoming the counsel of Ansuya, Sita spoke to her, “My mother after my marriage has 
given similar advice to me. My mother-in-law also advised me to look after the husband 
irrespective of the convenience and comfort being delivered from the husband. I admire 
your auspicious advice to me, and I am fortunate to see you here in forest." 

Hearing endearing words of Sita, Ansuya offered her to seek boon from her. Sita, 
respectfully submitted, “With your blessings I have all what I need.” Ansuya, thereafter, 
on her own gifted her with celestial clothes, jewels and fragrances. She mentioned, 
“These gifts are of celestial origin and shall remain as it is irrespective of their number of 
uses. You will yourself look like goddess Lakshami and your husband would appear like 
Vishnu.” 

Ansuya curiously enquired from her, “I have heard about your marriage by holding a 
swyamvara, tell me in detail about that." 

Sita narrated her story, “There was a king Janak in the kingdom of Mithila. He was 
valiant, dutiful and righteous as well in ruling the state. Once while tilling the land, he 
found me as a female child coming out of the earth opened up by the tip of the flow. 
Taking me in his lap he called me as daughter, and soon he heard a voice from unseen 
object that the child is a rare one and fit to be your daughter. He handed over me to 
chief queen who took utmost care in rearing me up. Subsequently he was favoured with 
remarkable prosperity of the state. When I grew up and attained the age of marriage, the 
king was curious to found a matching groom.” 

Sita continued, “Varun, the rain god had once gifted a mighty bow and two quivers ever 
full of shafts. He invited a swyamvara of princes with a condition that Sita would accept 
only that person who would be able to lift the bow. None of the princes could lift the bow 
and they left saluting that. Later, Viswamitr arrived with Ram and Lakshaman to attend a 
sacrificial celebration (ygya ) organized by my father. The sage asked my father to show 
the divine bow to Ram. The bow being heavy was brought by carriers. Ram picked the 
bow up, fixing the string tight, stretched it fully. In this process the bow broke into two 
pieces with a thunderous sound shaking the earth. My father was glad to find a groom 
for me. Ram didn’t accept the offer until it was permitted by his father, king Dasarath. 
The king was invited to Mithila, and he gave the approval of marriage. I was married to 
Ram, and my sister Urmila was married to Lakshaman.” 

2-119 Ram moved forward in forest ( 22 / 4310) 

Ansuya was glad to hear the story about Sita’s marriage from her own mouth. 
Embracing Sita closely, she kissed her forehead. She pointed out to Sita about the end 


Page 52 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Ayodhya kand 


of the day and onset of night, “The birds are getting back to their shelter. The hermitages 
of sages are seen with column of sacrificial smoke coming out in the sky. I would advise 
you now to go to Ram.” 

When Sita intended to move out, she asked her to demonstrate to her how do those 
cloths and jewels fit over her body. Sita obeyed her command and when she saw Sita 
wearing all those celestial ornaments, she was extremely delighted. Sita saluted Anusya 
by touching her feet, and moved where Ram was sitting. 

When Ram saw Sita coming fully dressed and bejeweled, he became very glad. Sita 
pointed out to him that whatever she was wearing were the celestial gifts offered to her 
by Anusuya. 

They stayed at night at Atri’s ashram, and in the morning when the ascetics had offered 
the oblation to sacrificial fire, they left for forest. The sages and ascetics forewarned 
them about the willfulness of demons who were after the blood of the ascetics, and 
those who violated scriptural conduct by way of staying without cleaning their mouth 
after taking food. They advised Ram to follow the beaten track made by the local 
ascetics who kept visiting the forest for collecting the fruits, and forbade not to take a 
new route while entering into the forward forest. 


Page 53 of 53 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Arnya kand 


Srimate Ramanuiav namah 

Preface 

In continuation of the earlier two submissions of Bal kand and Ayodhya kand , the third 
submission is of Arnya kand. Arnya marks the turning point in the events constituting the glory of 
bhagwan Ram. His test of supreme divinity is confirmed when he combated successfully the 
demons lead by Khar, Dushan and Trishira. 

This kand is spread over 75 sarg, depicted originally by sage Valmiki in 2467 Sanskrit verses 
{shlok). Sarg 14 covers the crisp description of the creation commencing from first prajapati 
Kardam to the last and fifteenth prajapati (forefather) Kashyap. 

Sarg 38 and 47 may be useful for those who are interested in fixing the age of bhagwan Ram and 
Sita. It appears he was 12 when he was married with Sita. After marriage he stayed for 12 years 
in Ayodhya, and in 13 th year, i.e., at the age of 25 he was to be crowned, but for the sake of 
benefits of sages and gods he was exiled and resided in forest. 

The physical description in sarg 73 / 74 of pampa lake, rishyamuk mountain, and saptsagar 
theerth is noteworthy for those who want to take a pilgrimage of kishkindha near Hampi, in 
Karnataka. 

Baal kand has total 77 sarg containing 2266 shlok, whereas Ayodhyaa kaand has 119 sarg with 
total shlok 4310. Arnya as mentioned above has 75 sarg and 2467 shlok. Total cumulative sum of 
shlok of Baalkaand, Ayodhyaa kaand, and Arnya kand is 9043. However this includes an 
intermediate sarg comprising of 26 shlok which does not have a separate assigned sarg number 
and this is after sarg 56 describing the effort of Brahma and Indr to assist Sita in staying safely in 
Lanka. 

Srimann Narayan Charnau Sharnam Prapaddye. (afrfRTWr STWt WTZ ) 

Submission: 

Srikrishna Prapnnachari 

January 20, 2010 

Magh shukla vasant panchmi 


i 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Arnya kand 


Contents 

page 

3-1 Hermits welcome Ram (23 / 23) 1 

3-2 Viradh grabbed Sita (26 / 49) 1 

3-3 Dialogue with Viradh ( 26 / 75) 2 

3-4 Viradh killed by burying (34 / 109) 2 

3-5 Ram at ashram of the sage Sharbhang (43/ 152) 2 

3-6 Sages met Ram (26 / 178) 3 

3-7 Ram visited Sutikshn ( 24 / 202) 4 

3-8 Ram departed for further forest ( 20 / 222) 5 

3-9 Sita cautioned Ram (33 / 254) 5 

3-10 Ram pledged firmness (22 / 276) 5 

3-11 Wandering Ram visited Agastya (94 / 370) 6 

3-12 Ram received divine weapons (37 / 407) 7 

3-13 Agastya sent Ram to Panchvati (25 / 432) 8 

3-14 Jatayu (36 / 468) 8 

3-15 Raising of Panchavati ashram (31 / 499) 9 

3-16 Staying at panchavati (43 / 532) 10 

3-17 Surpanakha at panchavati (29 / 561) 11 

3-18 Surpanakha penalized (26 / 587) 11 

3-19 Surpanakha complained to Khar (26 / 613) 12 

3-20 Ram killed fourteen demons (25 / 638) 12 

3-21 Surpanakha apprised Khar (22 / 660) 12 

3-22 Khar departed to panchavati (24 / 684) 13 

3-23 Bad omens to Khar (34 / 718) 13 

3-24 Ram in readiness ( 36 / 754) 13 

ii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Arnya kand 


3-25 Ram in encounter ( 47 / 801) 13 

3-26 Dushan eliminated (38 / 839) 14 

3-27 Trishira killed ( 20 / 859) 14 

3-28 Khar in combat ( 33 / 892) 15 

3-29 Khar made weaponless (28 / 920) 15 

3-30 Khar killed (41 / 961) 15 

3-31 Akampan alarmed Ravan (50 / 1011) 15 

3-32 Surpanakha rushed to Ravan (25 / 1036) 16 

3-33 Surpanakha criticized Ravan (24 / 1060) 17 

3-34 Surpanakha provoked Ravan (26 / 1086) 17 

3-35 Ravan reached Marich again (42 / 1128) 17 

3-36 Ravan revealed his plan (24 / 1152) 18 

3-37 Marich talked about Ram ( 25 / 1177) 18 

3-38 Marich recalled his experience (33 / 1210) 19 

3-39 Marich recalled another incident (25 / 1235) 19 

3-40 Ravan threatened Marich (27 / 1262) 19 

3-41 Marich pleaded in vain (20 / 1282) 20 

3-42 Marich disguised as golden deer ( 35 / 1317) 20 

3-43 Sita demanded the deer (51 / 1368) 20 

3-44 Ram killed the deer (27 / 1395) 21 

3-45 Lakshaman driven out to Ram (40 / 1435) 21 

3-46 Ravan appeared as an ascetic (38 / 1473) 22 

3-47 Sita rebuked Ravan (50 / 1523) 22 

3-48 Sita continued rebuking Ravan (24 / 1547) 23 

3-49 Sita abducted (40 / 1587) 24 

3-50 Jatayu defied Ravan ( 28 / 1615) 24 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Arnya kand 


3-51 Jatayu fought until last (46 / 1666) 24 

3-52 Ravan flew away with Sita again (44 / 1710) 25 

3-53 Sita denounced Ravan (26 / 1736) 24 

3-54 Sita brought to Lanka (30 / 1766) 25 

3-55 Sita in inner palace ( 37 / 1803) 26 

3-56 Sita in ashok van (36 / 1839) 26 

3-57(A) x Indr offered Sita divine milk and rice porridge (26 / 1865) 27 

3-57 (B) Ram notice bad omens ( 23 / 1888) 27 

3-58 Ram couldn’t find Sita (20 / 1908) 28 

3-59 Discourses between Ram and Lakshaman (27 / 1935) 28 

3-60 Lamenting enquiry about Sita (38 / 1973) 28 

3-61 Ram and Lakshaman kept hunting (31 / 2004) 29 

3-62 Lamenting Ram (20 / 2024) 29 

3-63 Lamenting Ram continued ( 20 / 2044) 29 

3-64 Ram in wrath (77 / 2121) 29 

3-65 Lakshaman pacified Ram (16 / 2137) 30 

3-66 Lakshaman counseled Ram to reasons (21 / 2158) 31 

3-67 Jatayu spotted (29 / 2187) 31 

3-68 Jatayu cremated (38 / 2225) 31 

3-69 Ayomukhi penalized (51 / 2276) 32 

3-70 Kbandh lost the arms (19 / 2295) 32 

3-71 Autobiography of Kabandh ( 34 / 2329) 33 

3-72 Kabandh cremated (27 / 2356) 33 

3-73 Pampa sarovar and rishyamuk mountain (46 / 2402) 33 


1 

This sarg is not common in several versions available of Valmiki ramayan. Geeta Press has included this incident of 
visiting Indr Sita in Lanka as a desirable reading material. 


IV 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Arnya kand 


3-74 Ram with Shabari (35 / 2437) 34 

3-75 Ram at pampa sarovar (30 / 2467) 35 


v 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


Srimate Ramanujaya namah 

Aranya kaand 


(75 sarg) 


3-1 Hermits welcome Ram (23 / 23) 

As Ram, accompanied by his wife Sita and brother Lakshaman, moved forward in deep 
forest he could see the number of hermitages there. Those hermitages looked attractive 
by the presence of group of birds, animals and varieties of plants. The columns of smoke 
rising from the fire squares to offer oblations marked their vibrant presence. The hermits 
were seen engaged in observing vedic rules for offering regular and timely oblations, all 
aimed to achieve welfare of the common people. 

Hermits could also notice the excellent personality of Ram made more attractive by the 
company of Sita and Lakshaman. The bows in their hands indicated their mightiness 
characterizing their royal lineage committed to ensure protection of the people. 

Hermits offered due respect to Ram by offering place of stay and food of fruits and roots. 
Those hermits were so involved in their scriptural practices that they have discarded all 
sorts of temptation, anger and wants. Because of the state of self emancipation by 
meditation, they couldn’t utter any curse on demons despite their several interferences in 
their daily life. They expected the king to secure proper protection to them. Whether 
Ram was in Ayodhya or in forest, they expected him to discharge his duty of a king to 
protect the inhabitants in his vast state. 

3-2 Viradh grabbed Sita (26 / 49) 

Early next morning, Ram sought leave of the hermits with whom he had spent night and 
moved forward. He could frequently see tigers, lions, elephants, and deer crossing his 
way. The birds were seen on plants and trees and enjoying the fruits and roots. Thus 
roaming about he spotted a mountainous giant wearing deer skin soaked with blood. He 
was carrying a huge trident where scores heads of wild animals were found perched. 
The giant had a look of Ram with Sita, and Lakshaman following them as the rear guard. 
He moved towards them and grabbing Sita and took her up. He enquired, “You carry 
bow and other arms like warriors but your dress is that of ascetics. Who are you in this 
deceptive outlook?” He introduced himself as Viradh, and mentioned, “She will now be 
my wife. I satisfy my hunger with sages’ flesh here, and soon I would devour both of you 
alive.” 

This happened so suddenly that Ram got a little unbalanced, and he mentioned, 
“Loosing Sita is the precious cost in my life. I could bear the loss of father, and grabbling 
of kingdom by Kaikeyi, but how can I bear such a great loss?” Lakshaman consoled 
him, “When I am here, no calamity would befall. I will show you the demonstration of my 
suppressed anger since your banishment from Ayodhya.” 


Page 1 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


3-3 Dialogue with Viradh ( 26 / 75) 

When Viradh insisted on their introduction, Ram replied, “We two brothers come from 
the family of Ikshavaku, and stay in this forest as a valiant kshatriya. Now you tell us 
your details who wander in Dandak forest so freely." 

Viradh said, “My father is demon Jav and mother is Shathruda. With my great penance I 
have been blessed by Brahma that no weapon would be able to cut or pierce through 
me. You forget this woman and both of immediately go back the way you have come. I 
will not take your life.” 

Ram got full of anger and reproaching him for his meaness charged seven shafts over 
him. Alothough Viradh enjoyed the boon, he was hurt by the arrows, and putting Sita 
over ground, he ran with his trident to attack them. Ram very swiftly cut his trident which 
fell on ground like two mighty mountains. Both the brothers rushed their attack on him 
with their swords, but he picked them up and keeping on his shoulder moved deep into 
the forest. Ram sitting on his shoulder allowed him to take them away with an intention 
to gather better information about that forest. 

3-4 Viradh killed by burying (34 / 109) 

Sita began crying seeing them being taken away by the demon. Both the brothers 
thought of killing him without further delay. Ram broke his right arm, while Lakshaman 
broke the left arm. The demon fell on the ground. Both tossed him up and down several 
times but he was alive. Ram asked Lakshaman to dig a ditch to bury him. 

Viradh recalled his curse and spoke to Ram, “ Now I understand you are Ram and he is 
your brother Lakshaman. The woman is your consort Vaidehi, Sita. Once I was delayed 
in attending the service of Kuber ( Vaishravan ) due to my lusty association with Rambha. 
He cursed me to become a demon, but also mentioned that I would be free of my curse 
by Ram only. I am a gandharva and my name is Tumburu. You know I have a boon of 
not being killed by any weapon, therefore I would die only by burying which you are 
doing. Besides, it is customary for demons for being buried at the end of life. I advise 
you to see a sage called Sharbhang, staying about one and half yojan from here. He 
would guide you further in this forest.” 

On preparation of the ditch by Lakshaman, when Viradh was being forcibly dumped in 
the ditch he created terrific sound. Ultimately he was buried with full coverage of earth 
over him, and he died. 

Ram taking Sita along, happily continued his journey further in the forest. 

3-5 Ram at ashram of the sage Sharbhang (43/ 152) 

Consoling Sita, and encouraging Lakshaman, Ram referred to the toughness of the 
forest life. While they were nearly close to Sharbhang ashram, Ram saw the brilliant 
shining chariot of Indr (chief of gods) surrounded and attended by hundreds of gods. 


Page 2 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


They were stationed just above the ashram and the chariot of Indr had green horses. 
The attending gods were charming and young (25 yrs) and it is said gods always look 
young of this age. Ram pointed out to Lakshaman about the presence of Indr just above 
the ashram, and he advised him and Sita, “Stay back for a while, until I come back with 
correct information.” 

Indr saw Ram coming, and he spoke to Sharbhanga, “I have to go now before Ram 
enters here. I can’t see him now, and I would meet him when he finishes the tough task 
of eliminating Ravan.” Saying thus, Indr’s chariot disappeared. 

Ram, Lakshaman, and Sita arrived at the ashram and paying their respect on the holy 
feet of the sage took to their seat offered by Sharbhang. Ram enquired, “Indr was here 
and he left before I entered.” Sharbhang mentioned, “Due to my selfless penance he 
was here to take me to brahmlok, which I denied to go before I meet you. I offer all my 
achievements of heaven and brahmlok to you.” 

Hearing this Ram spoke, “I would grant you eternal abode including the other higher 
domains 1 , but at the moment I am seeking guidance for a shelter to stay in forest (3-5- 
33). 

Sharbhaga replied, “I would advise you to see Sutikshn sage staying nearby. He would 
make all arrangements for your stay in the forest. Take the route along the bank of the 
river Mandakini in opposite direction of the current of the stream. This will lead you to the 
ashram of Sutikshn. Before you go, let me quit this mundane and old body. ” 

Sharbhang lit the sacrificial fire and pouring ritual oblations, he himself entered into the 
fire. When his physical remains were totally burnt, there came out a resplendent person 
over the flames, who offering due respect to Ram marched towards brahmlok crossing 
the abodes of sages, and gods. When he arrived in brahmlok , Brahma offered him due 
respect and proper reception. 

3-6 Sages met Ram (26 / 178) 

After the glorious departure of Sharbhang, other sages gathered for the glimpse of Ram. 
Several distinct groups of sages who met Ram were: (i) vaikhanas - born from the nails 
of Brahma, (ii) valkhilya - born from the hair of Brahma, (iii) samprakshal - those who 
keep their food pots cleaned after meal and don’t possess for future use, (iv) marichip - 
those who sustain their life on the energy absorbed from sun and moon, (v) asmkutt - 
taking raw grains pounded with stone, (vi) ptrahar - those staying on leaves of plants, 
(vii) dantolukhali - those who use their teeth as pestle, (viii) unmajjak - those who carry 
out penance immersed in throat deep water, (ix) gatrasyya - whose body is bed itself, 
(x) asayya - without access to bed, (xi) anwakasik - don’t enjoy relaxing moment 
leaving good works, (xii) salilahar - sustaining life on water, (xiii) vayubhaksh - 


1 

Through this assurance Ram indicated about His supreme divinity. The same shlok in verbatim is found 3-7-14 assuring 
Sutikshn. 


Page 3 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


sustaining life on air, (xiv) akashnilay - staying in open sky, (xv) sthandilsayi - sleeping 
on sacrifice squares, (xvi) urdhvavashi - staying on high places of mountains, (xvii) dant 
- controller of senses, (xviii) ardrapatwasa - always wear wet garment, (xix) sajap - 
constantly conducting japa (mental recitation), (xx) taponishth - constantly meditating, 
(xxi) panchagni - surrounded by heat in open sky during summer. 

They together acquainted Ram with the state of helplessness in face of atrocities of 
demons. They mentioned, “Being the royal representative of this zone you are our 
protector. It is said when the king collects one sixth of the income from the citizens of 
the state, he is bound to provide due protection to the citizens. It is also said that one 
fourth of the auspicious output of the sages goes in favour of the king.” 

They showed Ram the skeletal remains of the sages left by demons after devouring 
them alive. Moved by the prevailing plight of the sages, Ram assured them, “My forest 
exile appears to be of some use to the sages. I would definitely do all what is needed to 
protect you against the demons. 

3-7 Ram visited Sutikshn ( 24 / 202) 

Accompanied by host of Brahmins Ram traversed the deep forest crossing river flowing 
with water. On way, the trees were found bearing ample fruits and flowers. When he 
arrived at the ashram of Sutikshn, he saw him in meditative state squatted over lotus 
posture with erect spine. Ram addressed him, “I am Ram, I have come to pay you 
respect.” Sutikshn opened his eyes and embraced Ram closely. He paid great respect to 
him and mentioned, “I had learnt about your arrival in Chitrakoot. On your arrival the 
ashram has attained a respectful status. We are very fortunate. I was awaiting your 
arrival and had ignored the request of Indr to depart for brahmlok. All the attainments of 
my life long penance, I offer to you, Lakshaman and Slta.” 

Hearing his soft submission, Ram mentioned, “Sage Sarbhanga who is descendant of 
Guatum muni, had told all about your sacrifice for the benefit of the common people. I 
admire your penance and assure you that I can readily provide you all the benefits which 
you achieved from your life long sacrifices (3-7-14). Now I seek your guidance for my 
proper shelter place around in the forest.” 

Sutikshn continued with his offer to Ram to stay at his ashram only, “All the wild animals 
gather here shedding their inherent animosity except a few deer who sometimes behave 
willfully. The trees and plants around here bear abundant fruits..” 

Welcoming his gesture Ram spoke, “Sometimes against willful deer, if I have to use my 
arrow, that will go against the code of conduct of tolerance of the ashram, and therefore, 
we would prefer to stay outside at some other place." 

Saying thus he went to perform sandhya gayatri (the daily ritual at dusk time). On his 
completion of evening ritual, Sutikshn himself brought and respectfully offered to them 
delicious cereal for their meal. 


Page 4 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


3-8 Ram departed for further forest ( 20 / 222) 

Getting respected by the sage, Ram spent the night, and in the morning all three of them 
took bath from water scented with lotus fragrance. They offered their proper worship to 
fire and requested the sage to permit them to depart from there to other part of Dandak 
enabling them to get familiarized with other sages. When Ram and Lakshaman touched 
the feet of the sage at the time of departure, he embraced them in affection and wished 
their auspicious forest journey. He also advised them to come back again. Sita helped 
them by holding their weapons while they were fixing them at appropriately position on 
their body. Twitching the bow string, two lion-men departed delightfully on further 
journey. 

3-9 Sita cautioned Ram (33 / 254) 

When they were on move, Sita softly submitted to Ram, “I like to caution your pledge 
against demons. Three acts are considered to degrade the person to a lower level: (i) 
speaking lie, (ii) lust for other’s wife, (iii) killing a being without animosity. However, in 
your case the first two don’t apply, but the last one has caused a concern to me. This is 
because you assured sages on their complaints against demons. I doubt, unless a 
demon directly harm you, will it be proper to attack or kill any demon ? In this respect I 
recall the story of a sage who was engaged in deep mediation. Indr afraid of his 
achievements visited his ashram and left his sword in his custody. Thereafter the sage 
concentrated on protecting the sword and got diverted from his main objective of 
meditation. Wherever he moved, he carried the sword. Always contemplating about the 
sword made him cruel and finally he fell to hell. In a similar way your association with 
bow and other weapons might make you cruel against those beings who don’t directly 
concern you. In forest we need to basically adhere to ascetics’ life style than that of a 
warring kshatriya." 

3-10 Ram pledged firmness (22 / 276) 

Appreciating Sita’s concern Ram spoke to her, “I should have myself taken care of the 
sages against their plight in forest. But they approached and familiarized me." Sages 
had also mentioned, “Although from the potential of penance we can hurl mortifying 
curse on the demons but afraid of erosion of auspiciousness gathered from the 
continued effort and under this fear of diversion from our meditation, we don’t want to do 
that.” 

Ram continued, “Now I have assured them to extend my all cooperation to deal with the 
cruel demons. How can I deviate from this? I am bound to observe the truth, and once 
committed I need to maintain that. In fact demons are at fault, because to satisfy their 
hunger from human flesh, they kill the innocent sages, and for a kshatriya mutely 
witnessing the happening of unfair act is a sin.” 


Page 5 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


3-11 Wandering Ram visited Agastya (94 / 370) 

While moving around, he was accompanied by some of the sages. At one place he 
found a pond having crystal water, and fragrant lotus spread all over had made it very 
attractive. There was no trace of any settlement near the pond but musical notes coming 
out of it and that attracted Ram’s attention. He enquired from Dharmbhrut, one of 
accompanying sages and the sage informed him, “Long back the sage Mandkarni 
undertook a severe penance. Gods got sacred for they apprehended that some of them 
might lose their position to sage Mandkarni. They sent five charming celestial dancers 
to intervene successful completion of his penance. Those dancers got success and the 
sage fell a prey to their beauty and lust. They got married to the sage and they continued 
staying with the sage forever. Because of his penance, the sage always looks young and 
those dancers stay in his service inside a mansion built hidden below this pond. The 
musical sound is combination of several instruments, the movement of the anklets of the 
dancers, and their vocal presentations as well. This pond is popularly called Panchapsr. 


Having moved further in the forest, Ram stayed in one of the hermitages on way. Thus 
he spent about ten years in that zone staying with sages. He kept wandering from one 
place to another. At some of the ashram he stayed three months, at another his stay 
was even longer. At some ashram he stayed for ten months also. In this process, at 
some of them he stayed for second time also. 

Moving around in this way he came back again to ashram of Sutkshn muni. While 
staying there, he expressed his desire to visit the ashram of Agstya muni. Sutikshn 
appreciated his enquiry and explained the route to Agastya’s ashram, “Exactly four yojan 
south of this ashram there is one ashram that belongs to brother of Agstya muni. That 
ashram is surrounded by dense pippilika groves near a charming large pond. The 
ashram of Agstya muni is one yojan from there.” 

Next morning Ram left for his destination of Agastya muni. Ram occupied the lead 
position, keeping Sita in the middle, Lakshaman followed as the rear guard. Having 
covered the indicated route, Ram could view from a distance ashram of the brother of 
Agastya. 

He spoke to Lakshaman, “As explained by sage Sutikshn, we now appear to reach 
ashram of that sage who is brother of great Agastya muni. It is well known fact that 
Agstya muni lives for the welfare of the all the beings. There were two demons called 
llval and Vatapi. Ilval used to visit sages in the guise of a Brahmin. His brother Vatapi 
was capable of taking the guise of a vegetable plant, llval used to cook that vegetable 
plant as one of the items of meal for the sages. When all sages had taken their meal, 
llval would call out his brother by name, Vatapi. To attend his call, Vatapi would come 
out tearing the abdomen of all the sages who had taken the meal cooked by llval. In this 
way hundreds of sages were being killed by nefarious design of these two demons 
whom they used to devour. Once they played the same trick where Agastya was also 
invited. By the potential of Agastya, despite repeated call out by llval, Vatapi never came 


Page 6 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


out and he was dead forever. Ilval attacked over Agastya in retaliation, but his sharp 
sight burnt the demon to ashes." 

Thus describing the glory of Agastya it was dusk time and they reached ashram of his 
brother. They offered their respect to the sage who welcome them with respect at his 
ashram. They performed their evening ritual and stayed there for night. Next morning, 
seeking the permission of the sage they left for ashram of Agastya muni. On way, Ram 
again revealed about the significance of the name Agastya, “One who stops the growth 
of mountain is called Agastya. In fact, once Vindhya mountain began rising up to hinder 
the sun’s route. On the initiative of Agastya, Vindhya stopped, and didn’t move further 
upwards. It is said gods come at his ashram for success in penance and meditation. I 
would also spend the balance days of forest life serving the sage at his ashram." 

When they arrived at ashram, Ram advised Lakshaman, “Go inside, and inform that 
Ram and Sita have arrived.” 

3-12 Ram received divine weapons (37 / 407) 

Entering inside the hermitage, Lakshaman spoke to one of the insiders disciples of the 
sage, “The elder son of Dasarath, Ram with his wife Sita have arrived here to pay their 
respect to the sage Agastya. I am his brother Lakshaman.” The disciple instantly went to 
the fire square where Agastya was engaged in offering oblation. On hearing the arrival of 
Ram with Sita and Lakshaman, Agastya spoke, “I was long waiting for his arrival, why 
didn’t you get him in.” The disciple rushed and welcome them inside, and in the 
meanwhile the sage also came out of the fire square. Leading a group of ascetics, 
Agastaya moved towards Ram, while Ram pointed out to Lakshaman, “See, the most 
brilliant personality is the sage Agastya, who is moving towards us.” 

Ram paid his respect to the sage by holding both of his holy feet. Sita and Lakshaman 
also touched the feet of the sage. The sage respected them by offering ritual water 
(< arghya , padya, achamaniyam ) followed by seats to them. He offered oblation in fire in 
respect of his special guests, and then offered food to them. Greeting them, the sage 
spoke, “You being all in all of all the lokas 2 (3-12-30), observe righteousness. I am 
delighted to respect you as my dear and respectful guest.” Saying thus he offered 
varieties of fruits, roots and flowers in their honour. 

Agastya offered divine weapons to Ram which was lying in his possession, “The bow of 
Vishnu made by viswakarma, one brilliant divine shaft obtained from Brahma, two 
quivers of Indr always remaining full of arrows, and one sword having golden handle with 
golden sheath.” 


2 Agastya expresses the supreme divinity of Ram (and not only an ideal human being as commonly propagated by some 
of the commentators of Valmiki Ramayan). 


Page 7 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


3-13 Agastya sent Ram to Panchvati (25 / 432) 

The sage was highly delighted with the special guest. He time and again appreciated 
their efforts for coming to his ashram and mentioned, “You must be tired of the forest 
journey. Sita, particularly has taken great pains in staying with you in forest. Normally 
women desert the husband in his period of calamity. All praise to her for adhering to your 
association ! Through my meditation, I have come to know all the developments and 
your arrival in the forest.” 

Ram respectfully submitted, “I am fortunate that our performances have impressed you 
and we have received immense affection from you. I seek your guidance for finding a 
place where we can stay” 

Agastay maintained silence for some time and then replied, “Two yojan south of this 
place there is a place called panchavati endowed with all natural facilities of flowers, 
fruits, roots and rive Godavari. I advise you to stay there which will keep Sita also 
happy.” 

Pointing out the route the sage mentioned, “Take north of this mahua grove, and 
thereafter there is a huge banyan tree. Going further there is a high and plain land. From 
there the mountain is seen, and the area around there is panchavati." 

They offered respect to the sage Agastya, and left for panchavati. 

3-14 Jatayu (36 / 468) 

While moving towards panchavati they spotted a huge bodied eagle and considering that 
as a demon, Ram asked, “Who are you?” The eagle speaking very mildly but gladly, 
advised Ram to consider him as a friend of his father. Hearing that Ram offered respect 
to him and became curious for his identity. 

The eagle began his introduction with the commencement of the creation, “The first 
forefather (prajapati) was Kardam, and down the rung were: 2 nd - Vikrut, 3 rd - Shesh, 4 th 
- Sanshray, 5 th - Bahuputra, 6 th - Sthanu, 7 th - Marichi, 8 th - Atri, 9 th - Kratu, 10 th - 
Pulastya, 11 th - Angira, 12 th - Pracheta (Varun), 13 th - Pulah, 14 th - Daksh, 15 th and 
the last - Kashyap. 

Daksh was blessed with 60 daughters and 8 among them married to Kashyap were: 
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kalaka, Tamra, Krodhvasha, Manu and Anala. Kashayap urged his 
wives to produce able persons committed to welfare of the creation. Only four of them, 
Aditi, Diti, Danu and Kalaka paid heed to his words. 

Aditi produced 33 gods: 12 aditya , 8 vasu, 11 rudra, and 2 aswini kumar. 

Diti produced mighty sons called daitya (demons) who had complete control over the 
domain of forest, seas and the earth. 

Danu gave birth to Aswgriva, and Kalaka produced two sons Narak and Kalak. 


Page 8 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


Tamra gave birth to five daughters who became producers of birds: Kronchi, Bhashi, 
Shyeni, Dhritrashtri, and Shuki. The birth of birds took place: owls are from Kronchi ; 
Bhash from Bhashi; Shyen and eagles from Shyeni; swans (bans and kalhans), 
chakrvak from Dhritrashtri. The youngest daughter of Tamra was Shuki who produced a 
daughter Nata, and from Nata was born her daughter Vinata. 

Krodhvasha established the species of animals by producing ten daughters: mrigi, 
mrigmanda, hari, bhadramada, matangi, sharduli, shweta, surabhi, sursa and kadru. 

• mrigi caused the birth of all sorts of deer, and mrigamanda produced bear. 

• bhadramada caused the birth of a daughter airavati, who produced mighty son 
airavat, the chief among elephants. 

• hari produced lions, and monkeys. 

• sharduli caused the birth of tigers. 

• matangi and shweta produced elephants of the respective species matnag and 
shwet. 

• surabhi gave birth to two daughters rohini and gandharvi. Rohini produced cows 
and gandharvi produced horses. 

• sursa produced nag (serpents), and kadru caused the species of snakes 
{pan nag). 

Manu gave birth to human beings: Brahmins (from mouth), kshatriya (from chest), 
vaishya (from thighs), and shudr (from feet). 

Anala caused the creation of all varieties of trees. 

Vinata, the granddaughter of Shuki (the daughter of Tamra) had two sons: arun and 
garud. 

The eagle concluded his description, “I am born of arun from my mother shyeni. We are 
two brothers, me as Jatayu, and Shampati." 

Jatau offered all help in establishing the shelter in panchavati, and at the same time 
assured protection to Sita when she would be alone in case two brothers go out in 
forest. 

Ram offered father like respect to Jatayu, who in turn embraced them affectionately. 
Ram then listened to the story how he had become friend of his father. 

3-15 Raising of Panchavati ashram (31 / 499) 

Taking leave of Jatayu they moved around the area which was indicated by the sage 
Agastya. The area had abundance of trees bearing fruits and flowers. River Godavari 


Page 9 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


was in close vicinity. There were other ponds with colourful lotuses floating over water 
surface. When Ram asked Lakshaman to select a place to raise ashram, pleasing to 
Sita, and convenient for access to water, Lakshaman submitted, “For infinity I had been 
dependent upon you, pray you to select the proper spot. ” 

Ram gave a round and found a place which had the surrounding natural scene of 
varieties of fruit bearing trees, lakes, several kinds of birds inhabiting on lake side, 
mountains reflecting the copper and silver hue looking like overlooking windows high in 
the sky reverberating the mild voice of dancing peacocks. 

On the selected site, Lakshaman built a beautiful ashram, using clay walls, wooden 
pillars, and inclined thatched roof having kush, shami etc. in different layers. On 
completion of the construction of ashram, Ram had a look and greatly appreciating 
Lakshaman’s effort; he embraced him close to his chest. 

Lakshaman taking bath in Godavari, brought flowers and fruits and carried out religious 
ritual for invoking auspiciousness in the newly built ashram. Thereafter they settled in the 
ashram. 

3-16 Staying at panchavati (43 / 532) 

Autumn ( sharad months ( ashwin and kartik znffcr) passed, and winter (hemant 

km) months of margshirsh mirfw and paush arrived. One day early morning, before 
sunrise, while going to Godavari for bath, Lakshaman followed Ram and Sita with a 
water pitcher in his hands. 

Lakshaman spoke to Ram, “During hemant km the influence of cold weather over the 
surrounding environment is perceptible. The paddy is ripe and the stems have bent 
down with the weight of sheaf of corn. Wheat and barley plants have sprouted adding 
lush green vision to the fields. New cereals are being offered to the gods. The dew 
points shine over the plants. The water is so cool that even thirsty elephants are seen 
sipping time and again with bent trunks. The air is cold because of westerly cold wind. 
The hill tops have shining condensed dew points. The winter night is hazy and moon has 
lost its attractive vision. The rising sun looks like the moon, and it becomes warm and 
lovely from the noon time. The water surface of the river is covered with dense fog and 
its visibility is guessed by the presence of chirping saras birds, and also from the edge of 
dew-covered sand bed.” 

Lakshaman grew nostalgic and mentioned about Bharat, “How pious he is ! He must 
have been staying like an ascetics. The one who enjoyed the royal pleasure must have 
been moving in the winter morning to Saryu for bath. It is said one’s inherent nature is 
more influenced by mother than father, but in case of Bharat this doesn’t apply. I 
wonder, despite association of king like Dasarath, and son like Bharat, how could 
Kaikeyi become so cruel?” 


Page 10 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


Ram intervened and forbade Lakshaman denouncing Kakeyi. He advised him to keep 
elaborating more on Bharat. While saying so he also craved for early union of the 
brothers at Ayodhya. 

Before sun rise they took bath in Godavari, and offered respect to sun when it rose 
above the horizon. They also offered glory to gods. 

3-17 Surpanakha at panchavati (29 / 561) 

Coming back from the river, Ram completed the forenoon oblation to fire. Subsequently, 
they together enjoyed the sitting in the open hut. Thus staying at panchavati, he used to 
host the greetings to several visiting sages to his ashram. 

Once he was in the company of Sita as if moon was enjoying the conjunction with chitra 
(3-17-4). Surpanakha a demoness arrived there and could see the grand personality of 
Ram in company of Sita and Lakshaman. Getting impressed by his charming rare 
personality, compared to her ugly physique made of large abdomen, red hair, split 
roaring voice she appeared in the guise of a beautiful woman and coming closer to Ram 
spoke, “With a lady in your company, who are you in the garb of an ascetic? How did 
you arrive here in the land of demons? What is your aim ?” 

Mildly Ram spoke to her, “I am elder son of the great king Dasarath. She is Sita, my 
wife, and he is my brother Lakshaman. By command of our father Dasarath, and mother 
Kaikeyi, we here in the forest. Who are you ? It seems, being a demon, you have 
assumed a disguised form of a beautiful woman. “ 

Surpanakha disclosed her identity, “ My name is Surpanakha. I keep roaming on my will 
over all places. I am sister of Ravan, son of the sage Vishrava, I presume you must have 
heard about him. Kumbhakarn, the mighty demon famous for his slumber is my brother. 
Vibhishan, my another brother is more righteous and has opposite nature than that of a 
demon. Khar and Dushan are also my brothers. I have great potential. Seeing you, I am 
impressed, and I propose to marry you which will keep you happy, and you will be able 
to enjoy the pleasure of the mountains and groves of Dandak forest with me. I will eat 
this woman who is ugly and skinny. I will also finish that man. We would have free and 
pleasant company." 

Hearing her proposal Ram laughed loudly. 

3-18 Surpanakha penalized (26 / 587) 

Ram spoke to her, “ I am already married and you will never be happy as a co-wife. My 
brother Lakshaman is alone here. You may appeal him to accept you as a wife.” She 
went to Lakshaman and expressed her desire to marry him. Lakshaman turning down 
her proposal said, “Look, O, charming lady ! I am an attendant of my elder brother. 
Becoming my wife, why do you desire to become a maid ? Go and appeal to Ram to 
accept you as his second wife and you will enjoy the elevated status.” 


Page 11 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


Taking his advice sincerely, she again came back to Ram and spoke, “Ignore this human 
being and marry me who is capable of all performances. You will enjoy your life. Since 
she is the obstacle on my, I would now finish her off.” Saying thus she rushed towards 
Sita, but Ram with his daunting nasal sound deterred her at a distance. Addressing 
Lakshaman Ram spoke, “Never use humour with demons. She was about to finish Sita. 
Penalize her immediately by cutting some vital organ.” 

Enraged Lakshaman drew his sword and cut off her nose and ears. Bleeding profusely, 
she ran away, and went to Khar, his brother. 

3-19 Surpanakha complained to Khar (26 / 613) 

She fell flat before his brother Khar. Seeing her plight of blood soaked body and defiled 
ears and nose, he became very angry. Defying the potential of the culprit who 
misbehaved with her, he asked as to how did she attain that condition. She narrated the 
details, “Two rarely handsome young ascetics equipped with bow and arrows are here in 
Dandaka. They are accompanied by an equally charming woman. They have caused my 
mutilation. I desire to drink the blood of that woman along with the blood of those two 
beings." 

Khara instantly commanded his mightiest contingent of fourteen demons, “Two human 
beings have entered with a woman in Dandak. Go and come back with their dead 
bodies, my sister wants to enjoy the drink of their blood.” 

Accompanied by Surpanakha, they arrived at panchvati, as if a gale has stormed the site 
with dark cloud. 

3-20 Ram killed fourteen demons (25 / 638) 

Arriving at panchavati those demons saw Ram and Sita sitting in a hut being attended by 
Lakshaman. Ram also saw them, and asked Lakshaman to take care of Sita for the time 
being, until he killed those demons. 

He moved forward with a bow in his hands, and addressed those demons, “You had 
been cruelly killing sages and Brahmins here. Why do you want to kill me? Due to your 
barbarity I have vowed to protect the sages." 

Those demons collectively attacked over him by hurling their deadly spears and tridents. 
Ram cut them away and then charged fourteen shafts at a time, which killed them by 
piercing through their chest. 

Scared Surpanakha quit the site instantly. 

3-21 Surpanakha apprised Khar (22 / 660) 

Coming back to Khar she lied down tossing like a snake on ground. Khar told to her, 
“We have sent the contingent and now there is no reason for your lamentation.” 
Disclosing the death of those fourteen deadly demons she exhorted Khar, “Don’t sit idle. 


Page 12 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


I want the blood of those human beings. They have challenged the demons in their 
home place Dandak. How would you allow them to move alive? If you don’t have 
courage then quit Janasthan." 

3-22 Khar departed to panchavati (24 / 684) 

On being prompted by Surpanakha, Khar commanded the army chief, Dushan to get his 
chariot ready and move fourteen thousand strong army to panchavati. Soon his huge 
chariot lead by piebald horses was brought to him. It was equipped with all sorts of 
weapons. The demons contingent having varieties of swords, tridents, spear and other 
remote attack tools left Janasthan. Khar was leading the contingent. 

3-23 Bad omens to Khar (34 / 718) 

Soon there were noticeable occurrences of bad omens. The color of sky changed to ass 
color and it rained mixed with blood. The horses of chariot carrying Khar fell down flat on 
ground. A large vulture perched over the flag of his chariot. Several inauspicious animals 
and birds were seen openly making terrible sound. The sun was encircled by a black 
ring and red border. Khar had witnessed personal bad omens as well for his left arm 
twitched frequently. His head ached severely. He noticed these omens but ignoring 
them encouraged his contingent, “Even death can’t face us today. Ram and Lakshaman 
have balance span of life until we reach Dandak.” 

Sages and gods appeared on the sky to witness the holocaust. They prayed for all 
auspiciousness to Ram. 

3-24 Ram in readiness ( 36 / 754) 

Ram observed the natural bad omens outside; wild animals, and birds were 
uncomfortable and leaving the forest for safe area getting sacred from the noise of the 
coming of demons’ army. He advised Lakshaman, “Please don’t argue, be ready with 
your weapons and take Sita to a safe cave in the opposite mountain. I would take care of 
the demons. Don’t worry, I am confident of my capability to deal them.” Lakshaman 
complied his command, and Ram fixed the necessary quivers, and weapons to his easy 
access. Gods and celestial bodies gathered in open sky to watch the valiance of Ram. 
Sometimes they expressed their doubt over his ability in lone combating the huge 
demons’ army. 

3-25 Ram in encounter ( 47 / 801) 

Coming near his ashram, Khar saw Ram standing alone with bow and arrows He drove 
close to him and was surrounded by trusted valiant demons. Addressing Ram to face 
him, he charged thousands of arrows which caused some bruises over his body. The 
demons also attacked simultaneously over Ram. Initially he was surrounded by demons 
and sustained several minor injuries. He kept on cutting off their weapons, and he drew 
the string such that the bow became circular in shape and he charged innumerable 
shafts over the demons. His unfailing shafts (na/ee/c, narach, and vikarni) created huge 


Page 13 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


casualties of the demons. Scared they had begun fleeing. In order to encourage the 
fleeing demons, Dushan with bow in his hands rushed to Ram. 

3-26 Dushan eliminated (38 / 839) 

Dushan used his tough arrows and the strong five thousand demons army coming in the 
front continued showering all sorts of weapons over Ram. Ram confidently kept warding 
off their attack and at the same causing sever casualties among them. He charged a 
shaft ( kshur ) to destroy the bow in the hand of Dushan. With some more shafts he killed 
horses, the charioteer, and forced him to walk on the ground. Taking a deadly axe, 
Dushan attacked over Ram like an angry snake. Ram cut down both his arms causing 
the axe to fall on the ground. Following the arms, the body of Dushan also collapsed on 
the ground and he was dead. 

Three army commanders, Mahakapal, Sthulaksh, and Pramathi made a concerted 
attack over Ram. They moved on foot using their axe, spear and swords. Ram in a 
moment, using his sharp arrows cut off the head of Mahakapal, plugged the eyes of 
Sthulaksh, and churned Pramathi into pieces. He also killed five thousand strong army of 
Dushan in next moments. 

Khar saw the loss of Dushan, and he attacked with his balance commanders and 
contingents over Ram. His twelve army commanders: Shyengami, Prithugriv, 
Ygyashatru, Vihamgam, Durjay, Karveeraksh, Parush, Kalkarmuk, Hemamali, Mahamali, 
Sarpasya, and Rudhirashan were collectively fighting Ram. Soon Ram killed them, and 
using karni arrow he killed hundreds and thousands of demons. The entire earth was 
covered with dead bodies as if kush had spread over the ground. Only Khar and Trishra 
survived and all others were lying dead over the ground. 

3-27 Trishira killed ( 20 / 859) 

Khar mounted on his chariot approached Ram in great anger. At the same time, Trishira 
also drove his chariot close to Khar and requested him, “Allow me to fight him out. If I kill 
him, you would go to Janasthan happily, but if I am killed then you would fight him. This 
is my chance and nor for you.” 

Trishira driving his chariot near to Ram charged several arrows some of them hit the 
forehead of Ram. Enraged Ram, made his without chariot by killing the horses, and the 
charioteer. While Trishira was jumping down the chariot, he charged heavily over his 
chest and using separate quick shafts cut down his three heads rolling down over the 
ground. 

Seeing Trishira killed, some surviving demons accompanying Khar took to their heels. 
Khar encouraging them got back to Ram. 


Page 14 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


3-28 Khar in combat ( 33 / 892) 

Khar reflecting for a while over the loss of Dushan, Trishira and the entire accompanying 
army became sad. However, he drove towards Ram and demonstrated his archery by 
covering the adjoining horizon with arrows. Ram also used his arrows to cover the 
balance part of sky with arrows. Coming close to Ram, Khar used sharpest of arrows 
nalik, narach, and vikarni and injured Ram very quickly. He used his sharp shaft to cut 
down the bow of Ram into two pieces and continued showering arrows over him causing 
physical injury to his body. 

Ram picked up another strong bow which he had got in gift from the sage Agastya. He 
used thirteen arrows to cut down his bow, the flag of chariot, killed four horses and 
charioteer, damaging the wheels and axles completely. Khar, picking up a mace in his 
hand jumped down and rushed towards Ram. 

3-29 Khar made weaponless (28 / 920) 

When Khar came close to him with mace in his hand, Ram reminded of his misdeeds, 
“You have killed several innocent sages, and now today you with follow them in the other 
world. On the line of your army, you also shall reach your end soon. Under the command 
of my father, I am here in forest to deal with devils like you.” 

Khar ridiculed his statement, “Ram, your self-praise is a foolish act. Don’t be over 
egoistic. Killing weak demons, you are mistaken of being a warrior." Saying thus he 
hurled his mighty mace over Ram, which he instantly cut into pieces by his tough arrows. 

3-30 Khar killed (41 / 961) 

Ram again reminded him standing weaponless, “You have lost not only all your 
companions but your weapons also. Soon you would follow your fellow demons after 
your death.” Laughing at Ram, Khar spoke, “Only talks won’t help you. See how you get 
your end now.” He picked up a sal tree and hurled over Ram with great force. Ram 
instantly cut that down, and hurled several shafts substantially damaging his body. He, 
finally charged, the shaft of Indr which killed Khar like the fire burns the dry leaf. 

Sages and gods showered flowers over Ram sighing a great relief against the demons 
atrocities. Janasthan was almost freed from demons. Agastya appeared and appreciated 
Ram for his miraculous deeds. He reminded Ram, “For this day, Indr didn’t see you at 
Sharbhanga’s place. We all expected you to carry out the valiant task of eliminating the 
demons from Janasthan. 

Lakshaman soon came back with Sita to offer his respect to Ram. Sita was glad to see 
Ram after such a great performance and offered him deep and affectionate respect. 

3-31 Akampan alarmed Ravan (50 / 1011) 

Akampan rushing to Lanka reported to Ravan about the loss of demons in Janasthan. 
Agitated Ravan spoke, “Whose end is imminent? How can demons be killed in 


Page 15 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


Janasthan. My wrath can’t be combated by Indr, Kuber, Yam and Vishnu. I am capable 
of burning the fire, and sun alike.” When he was a little cooler, Akampan sought his 
permission to elaborate on the developments, “Ram is son of Dasarath. He is 
accompanied by his wife Sita and brother Lakshaman. They are live manifestation of 
charm and beauty." 

Ravan wanted to know whether Ram had arrived in Janasthan with Indr and other gods. 
Akampan continued, “Ram is expert in warfare and archery. No archer on earth can 
match his skill. He alone killed Khar, Dushan and other thousands of demons. None of 
the sage or gods had helped him. 

Anxious Ravan spoke, “I shall now move to Janasthan and kill those two brothers.” 
Akampan opposed his idea and forewarned him against the eventuality. He proposed, 
“There is only one way to kill Ram. His wife Sita is the beauty queen of the universe. If 
you steal her away, I am sure he would sacrifice his life.” 

Ravan appreciated his advice and soon mounting the chariot carried by asses he drove 
to Marich (the son of Tataka) in forest. Offering respect to Ravan, Marich spoke, 
“Greeting you here, I wonder whether everything is fine with you. I notice mark of 
concern over your face.” Ravan replied, “ I am greatly concerned of the killing of Khar, 
Dushan and other demons in Janasthan. Ram alone killed all the demons. I seek your 
help in stealing away his wife Sita.” 

Marich rejecting his proposal advised him to withdraw this idea, “Someone must be not 
only your enemy but enemy of the demons’ race who advised you to carry out this act of 
stealing Sita. You will lose all your dignity and auspiciousness. Soon you will reach to 
the brink of total annihilation. Ram is a lion whose limbs represent various elements of 
rare valour. He is himself the manifestation of unparallel skill in warfare. He is second to 
none in archery and battle field. You enjoy with your wives the royal Lanka, and let him 
enjoy his life with his wife Sita in forest.” 

Ravan appeared to have been reasoned by his advice, quietly came back to Lanka. 

3-32 Surpanakha rushed to Ravan (25 / 1036) 

Scared by the elimination of the demons including valiant warriors Khar, Dushan and 
Trishira, Surpanakha rushed to Ravan. When she entered Lanka, Ravan was found 
surrounded by his ministers on the highest floor of the pushpak viman. He was 
occupying the golden throne and appeared like a glowing flame of fire. He was known 
for his valour and victory. The dent of tusk of airavat was yet visible on his chest. His 
body still carried the marks of vajra and asni while he fought gods. Once he entered 
Kailas and snatched the best of air plane called pushpak viman from Kuber. Several 
times he had damaged Kuber’s chaitrarath grove, and Nalini lake famous for saugandhik 
lotus, Indr’s nandan van, and other celestial groves. He was capable of stopping sun and 
moon from rising. For ten thousand years he carried out penance and on offering his ten 
heads he pleased Brahma. He was immune against any harm from any of the creatures 


Page 16 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


in the world except human beings. He was cruel and had stopped sages from performing 
any sacred ygya. Surpnakha saw Ravan, famous for making others weep, and getting 
closer to him narrated her plight. 

3-33 Surpanakha criticized Ravan (24 / 1060) 

She criticized her way of governance, “You act like a simple boy unaware of what is 
happening around. If you spend your time in enjoying the royal comfort, soon the days 
will come when you will lose your kingdom. The king who fails in gathering the 
information from spies has a doomed future. The used flowers and cloths are worthless, 
similarly a careless king loses the grace. If you don’t maintain your formidable 
personality, you are destined to be ignored by citizens. Janasthan has been made 
devoid of demons by Ram and you are not concerned about that.” 

Hearing her harsh words, Ravan grew more concerned. 

3-34 Surpanakha provoked Ravan (26 / 1086) 

Angry Ravan asked her, “Who is this Ram, and why did he come in Dandak ? Can tell 
me about him in detail? How did you lose your nose and ears?” 

Surpanakha mentioned, “Ram is a son of king Dasarath. He physique is charming with 
long arms, and lotus like eyes. His look is more impressive than cupid. He wears deer 
skin and bark. Being on foot, he killed fourteen thousand demons, Khar and Dushan, 
mounted on chariots. I couldn’t see how swiftly he pulled the arrows, loaded the bow and 
charged them. I could only see demons falling like cut down trees over ground. He has a 
brother accompanying him equally handsome, valiant and subservient to him. His wife 
accompanying him has no other match in this creation. She is like second goddess 
Lakshami. Her name is Sita and she is daughter of Janak. I tried to kidnap her for you, 
but Lakshaman insulted me by cutting my nose and ears and since I am a woman I have 
been spared alive, otherwise I would have been killed like other demons. O, Ravan, get 
up and grab that woman Sita, you will have rare comfort in her association.” 

3-35 Ravan reached Marich again (42 / 1128) 

With anxiety, Ravan consulted the ministers, and silently entered the parking place of 
chariots. He picked up a comfortable and automatic moving chariot carried by asses. 
The chariot moved out and he received all royal treatment inside the chariot, i.e., white 
umbrella over his head, and fanning by white chavar. He kept roaming around the 
coastal area and enjoyed varieties of scenes: springs from mountain top, sandal grove 
with scented breeze around, silver and gold mountain tops, forests rich in fruits and 
fragrant flowers bearing trees, towns with elephants, horses and chariots. He passed 
over a huge banyan tree having branches spread over one hundred yojan , under which 
several ascetics were engaged in their life cherished penance. Once Garuda, carrying 
his food items, one elephant and a tortoise, arrived with speed and perched over one of 
its branches. With his weight, the branch broke, but Garuda very swiftly held the branch 
and prey in his possession and flew in the sky. This saved the lives of several sages 


Page 17 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


who were engaged in deep meditation under the tree. He finished his food eating 
elephant and tortoise while flying, and threw the branch over the land of Nishad which 
caused several casualties. That banyan tree is called Subhadra vat. Getting doubly 
satisfied with his success, Garuda entered into heaven and took out the pitcher of 
ambrosia locked in a safe place. Ravan took a look at the famous banyan tree, and 
moved to the opposite shore of the sea. Here he entered the hermitage, where Marich 
was engaged in penance in an ascetic’s garb. Marich warmly greeted Ravan by offering 
several varieties of food and drink. He enquired the purpose of his second visit in quick 
succession. 

3-36 Ravan revealed his plan (24 / 1152) 

Ravan spoke, “Marich, you are aware Janasthan had dominance of demons. Khar, 
Dushan, Trishira and fourteen thousand demons had controlled this place where sages 
were not free to conduct their ygya. Ram killed all of them. He has been banished by his 
father to forest and is staying here with his wife and brother. He is cruel, and violator of 
righteousness. Without any fault, my sister Surpanakha has been humiliated and he cut 
her nose and ears. I plan to steal away his wife, and in her absence he won’t be able to 
survive. My plan is that you move in front of their ashram in the guise of charming golden 
deer having silver pie bald spots. Attracted by the golden deer Sita would direct them to 
catch. When they would follow you, I finding her alone at ashram would easily take her 
away. I know you are only capable of doing this, and being a demons’ pride help me to 
realize this plan.” 

Hearing his words, Marich became afraid, scared and sad. 

3-37 Marich talked about Ram ( 25 / 1177) 

With pale face looking towards Ravan, Marich spoke, “I am surprised about your 
feedback about Ram. What you told is incorrect. He is a portrait of righteousness and 
kindness to all beings. He has not been banished by his father. Queen Kaikeyi had 
deceptively taken words from the king to banish Ram. When Ram learnt it he himself left 
for forest and he had proved his father true to his assurances and words to queen 
Kaikeyi. Ram is a burning fire where his arrows make the flame, and bow and sword are 
the fuel. Sita is a chaste Woman who always follows Ram. If you want to invite calamity 
upon you and the entire demons’ race of the earth, then only take the steps forward to 
steal her. Has she come to end your life? You won’t be able to face Ram in a combat. 
Being adherent of Dharma, he has saintly kindness, and is supreme 3 trt (3- 

37-13) in all the worlds. You must assess correctly his strength, and then reflecting upon 
your plan in correct perspective , do what you find proper.” 


3 Marich, by this expression proves the universal divine supremeness of Ram (and not only an ideal human being, 
contrary to common notion of some of the commentators about Valmiki Ramayan ). 


Page 18 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


3-38 Marich recalled his experience (33 / 1210) 

Recalling his previous experience with Ram, Marich narrated the story, “I in a 
mountainous form, pitch black in colour, wearing shining golden earrings used to roam 
around freely in Dandkarnya. I was fearless because of boon of immortality from gods. 
Vishwamitr, scared of my disturbance in his ygya, went to Dasarath and sought the 
hands of Ram. Dasarath expressed his inability in sparing Ram who was below twelve 4 
(3-38-6) and not familiarized with the warfare skills and volunteered himself with his 
army to protect the sage’s ygya. Viswamitr didn’t agree and he insisted that only Ram 
was acceptable to him. Ram (and Lakshaman) accompanied the sage and were on 
guard of his ygya. I arrived at the venue of ygya and had a look of Ram guarding the 
venue with a bow. He was resplendent with his divine brilliance and charming 
personality. Having seen me, he strung his bow, but ignoring him I rushed to the fire 
square for I was confident of boon of my immortality granted by gods. Immediately I 
received a severe shot of shaft throwing me one hundred yojan away deep into sea 
water where I regained my consciousness after a long time. It seems he spared my life, 
as all other demons accompanying me were killed. I therefore forbid you in taking any 
hasty step against him. The pleasure and peace of Lanka would be ruined. The demons 
enjoying their life would be eliminated and you with all your kith and kin would be guest 
of the death world.” 

3-39 Marich recalled another incident (25 / 1235) 

Marich continued with Ravan, “I recall another incident when Ram came as an ascetic to 
Dandak forest. Along with two other demons, I disguised as deer tried to retaliate my 
previous humiliation. We had sharp horns and rushed towards Ram to kill him. Sensing 
our malafide motive Ram charged three shafts to us. I could realize the potency of the 
shaft from my previous experience, and turning around ran away, whereas the other two 
were killed on the spot. I got a second grant of life. Thereafter I am so scared of him that 
all around in Dandak I see him on all trees, leaves and entities. I discarded my demonic 
attitude and now I resort to regular meditation.” 

He further cautioned him, “If you take advantage of my experience drop your fatal plan 
and relax in Lanka. If you don’t give attention to my words, I won’t be any help to you 
and I would take that demons’ are doomed to be destroyed soon.” 

3-40 Ravan threatened Marich (27 / 1262) 

Ravan reacted sharply over the advice given by Marich, “I had asked you only to help 
me in realizing my plan. I didn’t ask your opinion on this. You know, before a king, one 
should do only what the king asks. You have transgressed your limits. A king is a living 


4 

Shlok 3-38-6 may be compared with shlok 1-20-2 (i.e., of Balkand sarg- 20, shlok-2 ) where Dasarath had mentioned 
Ram’s age below 16, where as in Arnya sarg -38, sholk- 6, Marich mentioned it below 12. This could happen because of 
colloquial reference by Dasarath. His correct age is better revealed in sarg 3-47 hereafter which matches well with that 
indicated by Marich. 


Page 19 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


representative of five gods ( agni , indr, som, yam and varun), and one must respect the 
king as if he is offering respect to those gods.” 

Ravan further repeated his plan, “Taka a form of a golden deer with silver spots. Roam 
around in the sight of Sita. Impressed by golden deer, she will ask Ram to catch. When 
Ram follows you, take him away and cry in his voice, Hey! Sita, Hey ! Lakshaman. 
Misguided by your cry Sita will force Lakshaman behind Ram. When both of them would 
be absent from ashram, I would abduct Sita conveniently. Later, deceiving Ram you 
disappear and come back to your staying place. For this assistance, I would share half 
my kingdom with you.” 

Ravan also threatened Marich, “If you disagree to oblige me, I would instantly kill you. 
Now you have to decide, whether you want to lose your life now or want to remain alive 
for a longer period even after implementation of my plan successfully.” 

3-41 Marich pleaded in vain (20 / 1282) 

Hearing heard Ravan’s resolve, Marich became a little harsh, “I don’t know who wants to 
ruin you. Your minister advising you like this must be taking revenge against you. By this 
act, no demon including you, would survive. The city of Lanka is now on the brink of 
disaster. If I don’t accept your proposal, you are determined to kill me. It is better for me 
to be killed by Ram, than getting killed by you. I am sure, soon you would also be 
finished.” 

3-42 Marich disguised as golden deer ( 35 / 1317) 

Expressing his impression, Marich accepted his proposal and asked him to move to 
Dandak. Ravan embracing him closely took him to his chariot being pulled by demonic 
asses. Soon they crossed various regions arrived at the ashram of Ram which was 
surrounded by plants of plantains. Marich transforming himself in a golden deer began 
grazing at the entry of the ashram. 

It roamed around for some time in near and a little away from ashram. Other deer group 
also arrived there, and after smelling golden deer’s body they left the place. Marich was 
habitual of killing deer for his food, but this time he spared the life of wild deer, and 
concentrated on his assignment to attract Sita’s attention. 

In the meanwhile Sita came out to pluck flowers. She had a view of the golden deer, and 
was engrossed in watching its beauty. She had never seen earlier such a charming 
deer. 

3-43 Sita demanded the deer (51 / 1368) 

Sita looked at the deer time and again and called out Lakshaman to come out with his 
brother. Hearing Sita’s sound, they came out and had a look of the deer. Lakshaman 
immediately had a doubt and said, “This is some deception. This could be Marich, who is 


Page 20 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


famous for disguise of deer and killing several kings and sages in the past. I don’t take 
this one as a real one." 

Sita continued with her impression, “Our ashram is visited by varieties of animals 
including group of deer, but never such a charming deer had been spotted. I would like 
to have this deer. If it is caught alive, we would enjoy its company here in the forest, and 
later in Ayodhya it will be an object of visual delight for our mothers, and brothers. If it is 
not caught alive, its skin would be equally useful.” She urged upon Ram to get hold of 
the deer. 

Ram spoke to Lakshaman, “This deer is definitely attractive and of rare species. Let me 
try this. If it is deceptive demon Marich, I would kill by one shaft. The kings had been in 
the habit of hunting deer in forest. In the pretext of hunting for deer lot of precious metal 
(gold, silver and other gems) have been gathered in forest. This is one of the source of 
enriching the coffer of the kings. The constellation of stars called mrigshira in heaven 
(3-43-37), and this deer on earth are worthy of possession.” 

Saying thus Ram asked Lakshaman to get ready with bow and weapons and guard Sita 
carefully. He also indicated to the readily available assistance of Jatayu around there. 

3-44 Ram killed the deer (27 / 1395) 

Ram equipped himself with sword, bow and arrow. Coming out he moved towards the 
deer which kept moving swiftly from one place to another. Sometimes it appeared very 
close and instantly disappeared to be seen at a far place. It also continued hide and 
seek among the trees. This way Ram was dragged chasing him for a long distance in 
forest. At one place, on green grass, Ram paused for a while and then decided to kill the 
deer. He took out a potential shaft of Brahma and loading on the bow discharged 
towards the deer. The deer was hit in the chest and tossing to the height of a palm tree it 
fell in the real form of the demon bleeding profusely. 

Ram saw the dying demon and found Lakshaman’s guess correct, “It was Marich.” While 
dying Marich cried loudly imitating in the voice of Ram, “Hey, Sita ! Hey, Lakshaman !” 

His voice caused much concern to Ram, “This would worry Lakshaman and Sita.” He 
became scared and his body hair stood erect. Gathering some fruits on way, anxious 
Ram soon left for his ashram. 

3-45 Lakshaman driven out to Ram (40 / 1435) 

When Sita heard the cry of Marich, she lost her balance and asked Lakshaman to move 
immediately to Ram. Lakshaman was not disturbed, and he stood on his position. Sita 
was scared and began prattling, “You want to grab me. Could be this was your motive 
while coming from Ayodhya, or Bharat would have plotted this. Your elder brother is in 
distress, he cried for help, and you don’t move to help him.” 


Page 21 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


Lakshaman assured her, “No creation in this world, be they gods, demons, birds, 
gandharva or any other celestial beings, is capable of facing Ram. After the killing Khar, 
the demons are trying to avenge and this cry is totally deceptive and false only to 
misguide us. I can’t leave you unprotected.” 

She again used rough words and threatened Lakshaman, “ I would prefer to be drowned 
in Godavari, or topple down from the high hills, take deadly poison but never be yours.” 

Hearing her unusual prattling, Lakshaman didn’t reply and mentioned, “O, gods of the 
forest, all creatures and plants, listen, I am being forced to quit her alone. Take care of 
her. I would now move to my elder brother Ram. Shall I be able to see her again when I 
come back? ” 

Sita continued her prattle and beating her belly and chest she kept cursing Lakshaman. 
Lakshaman offered his mild salutation and moved away from there. 

3-46 Ravan appeared as an ascetic (38 / 1473) 

Ravan disguised in an ascetic garb had reddish cloth, tuft of hair ( shikha ), umbrella, 
footwear, and a baton over left shoulder helping to carry water pot. He went nearer to 
Sita who was lamenting with tears in her eyes for her husband. The presence of 
formidable Ravan as an ascetic caused sense of fear in the Dandak, “The leaves of the 
trees didn’t shake, wind stopped, Godavari had a slowed down in flow.” 

Ravan looked upon Sita as if Mars and Saturn (3-46-5/6) had malefic aspect over rohini 
nakshatra. She was immersed in anxiety about her husband, and Ravan appeared to 
her as if Saturn had conjunction with chitra nakshatra (3-46-10). 

Ravan addressed her, “Who are you? Are you one among Lakshami, or wife of cupid, 
Rati ? Your beauty doesn’t have any parallel. This forest is not inhabited by gods, kinnar 
or gandharva, rather it is infested with demons. You are fit for a royal dwelling, how did 
you come here in deep and deadly forest visited frequently by lions, tigers, elephants 
and deadly man eating devils? 

Seeing an ascetic arrived, she rose to offer respect. She brought water and fruits and 
putting on the mat mentioned, “Take water, and fruits, which I can offer in your honour.” 

Saying thus her eyes gazed outside to locate Ram but except green and dense forest 
she couldn’t find him coming. 

3-47 Sita rebuked Ravan (50 / 1523) 

Sita reflected on the queries of the Brahmin ascetic with fear of his curse if she didn’t 
answer; she replied, “I am daughter of the king of Mithila, Janak and married to Ram, 
the king of Awadh. After the marriage, I stayed for twelve years (3- 47-4) at Ayodhya 
enjoying the royal facilities at the fort of the family of Ikshavaku, the king Dasarath. In the 
thirteenth year (3- 47-5) the king Dasarath with the advice of the ministers and well 
wishers desired to crown Ram as successor prince. The mother-in-law Kaikeyi then 


Page 22 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


claimed her boons from the king (i) crown to Bharat, and (ii) exile to Ram. The king was 
shocked, and he persuaded Kaikeyi to allow the crowning of my husband without any 
obstacle for which he promised her all the valuables she could desire to have. At that 
time my husband was of twenty-five 5 and I was eighteen (3- 47-10/11) from my Birth. 
Kaikeyi repeated the claims in front of Ram, who immediately honored the words of his 
father, and left for forest. I also followed him, and he was joined by his brother, 
Lashaman, a valiant prince in his forest life. My husband is righteous and adherent of 
truth. You wait here for some time, and he would be coming with lots of delicious fruits 
and roots.” 

Saying this, Sita enquired from Ravan his introduction. Ravan spoke in egoistic words, 
“I am Ravan, a terror for gods, demons and humans. Sita, I have abducted several 
beautiful women in the past. My capital is Lanka situated at a mountain top surrounded 
by sea. You are fit to become my wife and once you are in Lanka you will find several 
comfortable groves for your pleasure. You will be served by five thousand beautiful 
maidens." 

Hearing the terrifying words of Ravan, Sita retorted, “My husband Ram is like a high and 
stable mountain, deep sea, and valiant Indr. You sinner, demon ! I am a lioness, and you 
are a jackal. Your this desire to have me is like: weighing mandrachal, touching the 
burning sun by naked fingers, wiping eyes with needles, cleaning knives with tongue, 
drinking deadly poison kalkut and still desirous of survival, willing to possessing sun and 
moon together, and trying to collect fire in a cloth.” 

She gave several examples to belittle him outrightly. She was so much agitated, that her 
body shook like leaves of banana. 

3-48 Sita continued rebuking Ravan (24 / 1547) 

With an intention to intimidate her Ravan spoke, “I am Ravan on whose indication gods 
dare move. When I am at a place, the leaves of the trees stop, wind slows down, river 
stops flowing. Sun looks like moon. I won over Lanka from my brother Kuber and now 
he has found a shelter in Kailash. His pushpak viman is in my possession. The city of 
Lanka reverberates with the movement of elephants, chariots on its wide roads. When I 
grow angry, Indr looks to me for command. You are lucky that I have come to you. Once 
you are with me, you will forget about your banished and weak husband.” 

Sita rebuked him, “You are mean that you tortured your cousin Kuber. Someone can 
escape punishment by abducting Shachi, wife of Indr, but he can’t go unpunished by 
taking away me from my husband Ram.” 


Ram had left with Vishwamitr, and soon he helped him in completing his ygya. Thereafter, he got back to Ayodhya via 
Janakpur where he was married to Sita. This suggests that age of twelve indicated by Marich in sarg 38 here in Arnya 
kand is more appropriate than that indicated by Dasarath in Balkand sarg 20. In fact, Dasarath’s statement about his age 
was general in nature just to convince Viswamitr that he was below sixteen, and how could he be able to protect his ygya. 
In scriptures, sixteen is demarcating age above which one is considered able to take up all sorts of responsibilities. 


Page 23 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


3-49 Sita abducted (40 / 1587) 

Ravan discarding his artificial form assumed his original form of the demon. He was 
seen in ten heads with twenty hands. He looked like a dark cloud with golden ornaments 
over his body. He was looking formidable and he spoke to Sita, “None of the gods can 
face me. I can dry ocean, and tear the earth apart, and hole up into sun with my arrows. 
You need to forget your ascetic husband and come with me.” 

Saying thus, he picked up Sita holding her hair by left hand, and supporting her both 
thighs by his right hand. This act of Ravan was as sinful as budh (a planet and son of 
moon from rohini) holding the hair of his mother rohini (3-49-16). Seeing Ravan in 
terrifying form, gods of the forest ran away. His vast chariot carried by asses appeared 
and he put Sita inside the chariot. When the chariot flew in the sky, Sita began crying 
loudly like a crazy woman, “O, Lakshaman, you are unaware, the demon in disguise has 
abducted me. O, Ram, you are known for your fair justice, how did you leave Ravan 
unpunished?” She, offering her salutations, addressed one by one various natural 
entities : trees, river Godavari, and kaner flowers etc. to intimate Ram that she had been 
abducted by Ravan. 

She saw Jatayu on a tree top and crying spoke to him, “You can’t stop this butcher, but 
kindly convey my husband Ram and brother Lakshaman that Ravan had abducted me.” 

3-50 Jatayu defied Ravan ( 28 / 1615) 

Jatayu was sleeping, but when he heard the crying sound of Sita, he discarded his sleep 
and addressed Ravan, “You are king and such act of abducting a woman doesn’t suit 
you. As you protect your wife from other persons, similarly you shouldn’t touch other’s 
wife. The misdeeds of a king, generate the tendency among citizens to repeat those 
sinful acts. My age is now sixty thousand years, and I have been protecting birds since 
long. You are young, compared to me. I am weaponless and you are fully equipped with 
them, still I won’t allow you to take away Sita stealthily in absence of her husband. Ram 
and Lakshaman are far away from here. If I go to intimate them, you will run away. I 
can’t afford to wait for them, and I shall fight and won’t allow you to take her away from 
here.” 

3-51 Jatayu fought until last (46 / 1666) 

Jatayu attacked over Ravan with his wings and claws. Ravan charged several tough 
arrows over him which he withstood easily. Flying close to his seat in the chariot, Jatayu 
snatching the bow from his threw that broken over ground. Ravan picked up another 
bow and showered arrows over Jatayu. 

Surrounded by arrows he looked like living in his nest. He didn’t care his arrows and 
again snatched and broke his second bow. With his wings he kept beating Ravan. 
Further he killed the asses carrying his chariot. Then he took off the head of the 
charioteer. Subsequently when he broke auto-flying axle of the chariot, Ravan fell on 
ground but he was holding Sita on his left lap with his left hands. He had lost his chariot, 


Page 24 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


and he was grounded. Ravan understood that Jatayu being old is tired now, and holding 
Sita he maintained to fly again in sky. 

Jatayu sat over his back, and kept pounding with his wings and claws over his left arms. 
The left side ten arms were broken and he fell down over the ground. Although, his new 
left arms soon sprang up, he released the hold on Sita, and commenced fighting with 
Jatayu. The weapons of Jatayu were wings, beak and nails. Ravan had become 
weaponless but he had his sword with him. He pulled out the sword and cut his wings, 
and claws. Jatayu fell bleeding over ground. His body was like dark cloud spotted with 
white belly. Sita ran and took him with full affection in her folds. 

3-52 Ravan flew away with Sita (44 / 1710) 

Sita continued lamenting over the plight of Jatayu. Ravan again rushed to her while she 
ran from one plant to another and embraced them to save herself. She continued crying 
for Ram and Lakshaman. 

He caught hold of her hair and lifted again in the sky holding her in his lap. With his this 
atrocity of holding Sita by hair, sun and wind gods were ashamed. There was darkness 
all around. Brahma was also ashamed to see this act of Ravan and he expressed, “The 
climax has reached now.” Sages were ashamed and understood the imminent end of 
Ravan. 

While Ravan was moving away fast in sky, various ornaments continued dropping down 
from the body of Sita. When one of the anklets dropped down from one of her legs, there 
was a scene of occurrence of lightening. One by one the ornaments were coming down 
as if meteorites were falling from the sky. When she lost her necklace down her chest, it 
appeared as if the Ganga descended down to earth. 

She continued crying and addressing Ram and Lakshaman, “The bad omens of birds 
and animals are observed all over, but Ram and Lakshaman unaware of my abduction 
have appeared to failed to notice them.” 

3-53 Sita denounced Ravan (26 / 1736) 

Sita continued condemning him for abducting her in absence of her husband, “The 
deceptive deer was, for sure your creation. You cajoled my husband away from me. You 
are a sinner, and soon you will reach the place where Khar had been sent. By Killing 
aged and elder bird-king, Jatayu, you call yourself hero, rather you must feel ashamed 
for this. The banks of vaitarini and deadly hell with pointed nails await your arrival. The 
one who alone eliminated fourteen thousand demons without taking assistance from his 
valiant brother, would soon deal you to your end." 

3-54 Sita brought to Lanka (30 / 1766) 

While she was forcibly being carried away from sky, Sita spotted five excellent monkeys 
sitting over a hill top. She collected her ornaments, tied them in a cloth piece and 


Page 25 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


dropped them down to those monkeys, expecting they would deliver her message to 
Ram and Lakshaman. While doing so she was crying for Ram and Lakshaman. Ravan 
didn’t notice her dropping the ornaments for he was not composed and immersed in 
deep anxiety. Crossing pampa zone, soon Ravan crossed the sea, house of Varun. The 
plight of Sita grieved sea god so much that tides fell flat, fish and other creatures 
became static. 

When Ravan entered Lanka he dropped Sita in his inner palace and deputed demoness 
on guard forewarning them not to hurt her feeling. He made the treasury of ornaments 
and precious cloths open for Sita. 

In order to keep eyes on developments in Janasthan, he met eight deadly demons and 
deputed them on duty to Janasthan. He mentioned to them, “Ram had killed fourteen 
thousand demons along with Khar and Dushan. You all eight are my trusted hands and 
you have to take the responsibility of filling the void created by absence of those valiant 
demons killed by Ram. Be on alert, and try to take revenge by killing Ram. Keep me 
posted with all the developments from there." Thus commanded by Ravan, those eight 
demons left for Janasthan. 

3-55 Sita in inner palace ( 37 / 1803) 

Ravan saw Sita pale and sad with tears in her eyes. In order to impress and win her 
favour, he forcibly took her all around his inner palace. The structures were decorated 
with gems and precious stones. Pillars and floors had lacings of colorful diamonds. The 
windows were made of ivory and silver with window grills made of gold. Number of 
groves and ponds were beautifully decorated. He asked Sita to enjoy the royal facilities 
of Lanka and forget about that ascetic Ram. Lanka is well fortified by surrounding sea. 
The expanse of city is in one hundred yojan. It is humanly impossible to come here to 
release you. Lastly, he placed his ten heads over her feet to seek her favour and accept 
the position of head queen. He committed that all his previous wives would remain her 
maid. 

3-56 Sita in ashok van (36 / 1839) 

Sita took a straw between her and Ravan as a screen and spoke, “My father-in-law 
Dasarath was truthful person. My husband Ram is committed to righteousness and 
truthfulness. If you had committed your act of abducting in presence of my husband, you 
would have been sent to yamlok like Khar and Dushan. Your balance life is short. As the 
ganga erodes the bank, similarly your sins have eroded your life. Gods may not be able 
to kill you, but you won’t be able to escape the wrath of Ram. I am like a sacred 
sacrificing fire square where chandal (like you) can’t find access. You do what you like 
with my transient and inert body, but I don’t want to retain it any longer." 

When Sita became quiet, Ravan threatened her with ultimatum, “I spare your life for 
twelve months (3-56-24). Thereafter my cook will prepare a feast dish using your body.” 


Page 26 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


He commanded the maids to take her to ashok van, and using carrot and stick policy try 
to bring her around. 

3-57(A) 6 Indr offered Sita divine milk and rice porridge (26 / 1865) 

Brahma took initiative and advised Indr to visit Sita in Lanka to offer her divine porridge 
made of milk and rice otherwise she might lose her life. Indr arrived in Lanka and with 
the help of goddess of slumber ( nidra devi) , kept demons sleeping. He went straight to 
Sita in ashok van and introducing himself tried to convince her that for the welfare of 
Ram and Lakshaman it was necessary that she must retain her life and that could only 
be done if she ate something to sustain her life. From this intention he had brought 
divine porridge made of milk and rice, and if she took that once she would stay for 
indefinite period without hunger and thirst. 

Sita didn’t believe him, and asked him to demonstrate his genuineness. When Indr 
showed her, “He could stay without touching ground, his eyes didn’t wink, his cloths 
didn’t gather dust, and the flowers around his neck remained ever fresh”, she could trust 
him and took that porridge. 

First she made a mental offer of that porridge to her husband Ram and his brother 
Lakshaman wishing their long life and then took that porridge to win over the need of 
hunger and thirst. 

Happily Indr with goddess of slumber ( nidra devi ) left Lanka. 

3-57 (B) Ram notice bad omens ( 23 / 1888) 

On his return journey, after killing Marich, he heard a jackal wailing on his back. He also 
noticed deer and other birds moving keeping him on their left. Their sound were also 
terrifying. All these signs of bad omen created deep anxiety in his mind. 

Pondering over the possible happenings he continued pacing towards his ashram, 
“Hearing the false cry of Marich, Lakshaman must have become uncomfortable, and he 
would have moved out in search of me. Finding Sita alone, the demons must have 
finished her.” 

Thus reflecting, he was moving, and to his surprise he could see Lakshaman coming 
towards him. First in harsh words, and then with mild voice, he spoke to Lakshaman, 
“What you did my brother ! you shouldn’t have left her alone. The bad omens produced 
by the animals and birds, and my left eye pulsating time and again suggest something 
adverse had already taken place with Sita.” 


6 This sarg is not common in several versions available of Valmiki ramayan. Geeta Press has included this incident of 
visiting Indr Sita in Lanka as a desirable reading material. 


Page 27 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


3-58 Ram couldn’t find Sita (20 / 1908) 

Thinking aloud, Ram continued, “Sita who followed me from Ayodhya, appears to have 
been targeted by the demons. If she is not alive, I would also shed my life. Kaikeyi’s 
objective of sending me in forest would be more fruitful. My mother Kauslya, in case of 
my death, would have no option than to serve Kaikeyi. While arriving at the ashram if 
Sita doesn’t welcome with her smile, I won’t survive in her absence. It seems hearing the 
cry of the demon in my voice, Sita forced you to depart for my protection. In any case, 
your this decision of leaving her alone is a blunder.” 

When they arrived at the ashram she was found missing. Ram searched inside, and all 
her favorite places outside. She was not located anywhere. Ram lost his balance, his 
face became pale and was immersed in deep and untold sorrow.” 

3-59 Discourses between Ram and Lakshaman (27 / 1935) 

Note: This sarg contains the talk between Ram and Lakshaman when Lakshaman met him on his return 
journey. 

Ram asked, “Why did you leave her alone? The bad omens of animals, birds and my 
left eye pulsation indicate the occurrence of something adverse with Sita.” 

Lakshaman narrated under what situation he left her alone, “Hearing your voice of 
Lakshaman ! save me! She became very agitated and asked me to move to you. When I 
didn’t respond, she used very harsh and unimaginable words against me. She called me 
an agent of Bharat, and also a selfish man who wanted to grab her when you die. I tried 
to assure her about your undefeatable potential by any of the creation. She didn’t heed 
to my words and on her repeat of harsh words against me, with my sullen eyes with 
anger, without replying her, I left the ashram.” 

Ram didn’t approve his act of leaving Sita alone and mentioned, “The voice seeking your 
help was false. When I charged my arrow on him, he discarded his disguised form, and 
appeared in his real form of a demon. While dying he uttered those words as if I uttered 
those words seeking your help.” 

3-60 Lamenting enquiry about Sita (38 / 1973) 

While searching her, Ram approached all the entities of forest: varieties of trees - 
Kadmab, Arjun, Kakubh, Kaner etc. Comparing similarity of her certain limbs with a 
given tree he continued asking from them about her where about. On way seeing deer 
and lions he enquired from them about her. The lake and river Godavari were also 
enquired whether Sita’s location was known to them. 

He also thought, “She is hiding somewhere, and moved around several plants and trees 
to locate her.” 

He guessed, “Demons must have devoured her alive.” 


Page 28 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


He wandered from one forest to another, crossing several mountains, and rivers. He 
asked Lakshaman whether he was able to see her anywhere. 

3-61 Ram and Lakshaman kept hunting (31 / 2004) 

They found the mat and flowers scattered on the floor of the ashram. She was not 
traceable within ashram, nor beyond that on lakes and rivers. Ram cried, “Don’t play 
such joke with me, Sita. It is not time for kidding and hiding.” Not getting any response, 
he repeated his doubts, “She must have been abducted or devoured by the demons." 

In her absence, I won’t survive longer. On my death, I would soon join my father in the 
other world. Seeing me there he would ask, “You didn’t adhere to your commitment, and 
without completing the term of forest you came here.” 

Lakshaman consoling him spoke, “It is not time for only lamenting. Let us hunt vigorously 
at all probable places.” Continuing search far and wide, and calling her name at loudest 
of voice, they couldn’t find any clue. Ignoring Lakshaman’s consolation, Ram 
commenced loud lamentation. 

3-62 Lamenting Ram (20 / 2024) 

Like a crazy person he cried with the flowers and trees, “ O, banana plant! O, Arjun !, O, 
Kaner! you can’t hide her.” He would then repeat the probability of her being killed or 
abducted by the demons. He mentioned, “What shall I respond to Janak, when he will 
ask about her..” 

He commanded Lakshaman, “Leave immediately for Ayodhya. I would be here in forest, 
and tell Bharat to rule the entire globe for ever. I am not coming back. Inform the 
mothers in detail what happened with Sita.” 

Lakshaman was also gripped by remorse, when he saw Ram lamenting bitterly. 

3-63 Lamenting Ram continued ( 20 / 2044) 

Ram mentioned, “My past deeds are responsible for my this plight. I lost my crown; I lost 
my mothers and well wishers; I lost my father; and now I lost my lovely Sita. The demons 
must have dragged her in forest. She must have been abducted from sky route. Her 
warm blood must have been drank by demons.” 

He enquired from Sun and Wind, “You are witness to all good and bad deeds. Nothing is 
unknown to you. Tell me about her.” 

Lakshaman was also in grief, but composing himself, he exhorted Ram to have courage 
and try to locate her than to keep lamenting. 

3-64 Ram in wrath (77 / 2121) 

Ram asked Lakshman to go and see whether Sita was in river Godavari. Lakshaman 
tried all around Godavari but couldn’t find her. Ram himself went to River Godavari and 


Page 29 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


asked Godavari to tell the clues about her. Other forest entities also silently sought the 
assistance of Godavari in divulging the incident. Nothing came out of her. 

Lamenting Ram mentioned to hunt her in river Mandakini, Janasthan, and prasrvan 
mountain. He was grieved, “What answer shall I give to Janak and mother of Sita.” 

When he moved further he shouted, “Lakshaman, the flocks of deer are trying to say 
something.” He approached one of them and asked about with a wailing voice. The deer 
raised their heads up towards sky and then ran towards south. Lakshaman got the tips 
and advised Ram to follow them. Soon moving southward, they reached to a place 
where flowers were found scattered. Ram identified those flowers of Sita. Ram 
expressed his obligation to sun, wind and earth who had protected those flowers of Sita 
to extend clue about her. 

Turning around towards prasravan mountain and river Godavari, Ram grew angry and 
spoke harsh words, “If you don’t tell me about her I would destroy your tops, trees and 
dry up the river and lakes." 

The mountains and Godavari then revealed some clue, “The large footprints of demon 
were seen”. Ram picked up the direction of those footprints, and soon he saw small 
footprints of Sita. A little away from there he found scattered the pieces of jewels of Sita. 
Still farther from there, spoils of broken chariot, dead asses wearing protective shield 
and a dead body of charioteer with lace in hand were visible. Next to that, broken bows 
and ground strewn with two quivers and arrows were seen. 

Ram thought and mentioned, “Demons must have torn apart Sita, and drinking her blood 
fought among themselves. None of the gods came to her rescue. The slayer of Tripur 
demon, Shiv also kept quiet. Indr and other gods have taken my traits of compassion as 
my weakness. Now onwards, Lakshaman, you will see my real terrible form and how I 
deal with the demons and other beings. I will stop the movement of stars and planets. 
Rivers, lakes and seas will dry up. If the gods don’t return my Sita to me I will 
demonstrate my potential." 

He picked up the bow from Lakshaman and mentioned in full wrath, “Old age, time, and 
death never spare any entity in this world. Similarly, I would also not be contained by 
anything here." 

3-65 Lakshaman pacified Ram (16 / 2137) 

Seeing his rare form of wrath, Lakshaman tried to pacify him, “You had been known for 
your compassionate and friendly gesture. Like the coolness of moon, brilliance of sun, 
dynamism of wind and tolerance of earth, you can’t shed your compassion to the beings 
of the creation." 

He further sought help from him in finding out, “Who is the culprit for abducting Sita? 
Only one chariot has been found to be spoiled here which suggests that it was not a fight 
between two or more chariot riding warriors, nor trace of army contingent is noticeable 


Page 30 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


here. The ground is soaked with blood and this suggests terrible fight has taken place 
here. For one culprit let there be no harm caused to other innocent beings.” 

Lakshaman further mentioned, “We will hunt out ocean, forests and mountains to reveal 
the truth of the incident. If gods don’t help in our endeavour, you will be free to penalize 
the world as per your wish.” 

3-66 Lakshaman counseled Ram to reasons (21 / 2158) 

Ram appeared tired with the deep stricken grief. He looked sick, and Lakshaman 
brought him to state of relaxation by massaging his feet. While doing so he also 
mentioned, “The king Dasarath had attained you as son, after a great and humble effort. 
Bharat had rightly mentioned that your virtues had been source of strength to Dasarath. 
Every person, gods and other beings pass through the cycle of sorrow and pleasure. 
During the period of calamity, the courageous ones don’t lose their patience. If, in anger, 
you penalize the entire creation, who will provide them succor. Your concerted effort 
should be used to destroy the real culprit. For someone’s fault don’t indiscriminately 
penalize others. 

3-67 Jatayu spotted (29 / 2187) 

Ram got his cool back and asked Lakshaman for further action. Lakshaman advised, 
“We must concentrate first in Janasthan which is abode of demons, gandharva and 
kinnara.” They together moved forward, with the bow loaded with the shaft called Kshur. 
Soon a huge body wet with blood was seen. Ram took that one as a demon who was 
lying flat after devouring Sita. He moved angrily with his bow in that direction saying to 
kill that immediately. 

Jatayu heard his voice and spoke feebly, “Ravan had abducted Sita and my life as well. 
When I saw him abducting Sita, I attacked over him and damaged his chariots, killed 
carrying asses, and charioteer, broke his bows and scattered his arrows, he finally cut 
my wings and claws with sword. I am almost dead, don’t further kill me." 

Hearing Jatayu’s voice, Ram fell unconscious and on regaining it back, began lamenting 
embracing him closely. He cursed his ill luck, “I suffered banishment, lost wife, and now 
lost the dear friend of my father as well.” Both the brothers lamented deeply for Jatayu’s 
plight. 

3-68 Jatayu cremated (38 / 2225) 

Ram composing himself again asked, “How did he do the abduction? What Sita 
conveyed for us?" 

Jatayu could respond in a feeble voice, “Ravan is a great deceptive demon. He caused 
storm and rain and took her away. The moment ( muhurt ) at the time of abduction of Sita 
was vind (3-68-13) . This muhurt is auspicious in the sense that the stolen item in this 
muhurt is retrieved. After injuring me mortally he moved in the south. ” 


Page 31 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


He wanted to speak something more, “Ravan is son of Vishrwa and brother of Kuber.” 
Thereafter he lost his consciousness and dropped dead on the ground. 

Ram wept bitterly for his loss and asked Lakshaman to make preparations for his 
cremation for he was dearer like father. Soon the fire wood were collected and rubbing 
two woods together, the flame was obtained. Keeping his body on pyre, Ram performed 
the last rites. Collecting roots and fruits he offered pind (ritual oblation in honour of the 
deceased) over kush. Both brothers offered water oblation in the river Godavari, and 
prayed for his emancipation. 

3-69 Ayomukhi penalized (51 / 2276) 

After the performance of last rites of Jatayu, both the brothers moved towards south- 
west ( nairut ). They crossed a lonely and deep forest. After that they moved about three 
kos in the south and arrived in the forest called kronch. The place was full of birds and 
trees and they hunted for Sita around there. From there moving about three kos in the 
east they reached the ashram of Matang muni. This was deep and dark forest. From 
there they saw a deep cave and near to that they found an ugly and dreadful demoness 
who was cruel in killing the beings in the forest. She came close to them and embracing 
Lakshaman closely she offered herself as his wife. Lakshaman pulled his sword and cut 
down his nose, ears and breasts. Crying terribly she ran away in the cave. 

Lakshaman felt bad omen and he spoke to Ram, “My left arm is pulsating which 
indicates bad omen, but at the same time the sound of the vanjul bird is suggestive of 
our victory.” They moved forward and soon they felt heavy storm. Before they could find 
out the cause, they found a deadly wall type demon before them. The demon was 
headless only the body was visible. The head had entered its belly, and the forehead 
was seen in the chest. This had one eye over the forehead. Its arms were long and 
extendable to several yojan. They found themselves in the trap of the demon. 
Lakshaman advised Ram to allow him to be a prey of the demon, and he should escape 
to locate Sita. The demon cried and enquired about the identity of the two brothers, and 
mentioned, “I hungry and looking for food. In the meanwhile both of you fell in my grip.” 

3-70 Kbandh lost the arms (19 / 2295) 

He was about to devour them, that Lakshaman advised Ram, “Let us cut the arms of this 
demon. The strength of the demon lies in its arms.” Soon, Ram cut down the right arm 
and Lakshaman cut down the left arm. The demon was bleeding profusely. When the 
demon asked about their identity, Lakshman spoke, “He is my elder brother Ram and I 
am his younger Lakshaman. Kaikeyi hindering his crowing sent him to forest. We were 
staying in Dandak that a demon had abducted his wife Sita. We are in search of Sita.” 

Hearing Lakshaman, the demon recalled his past incident. He welcome them, and 
appreciated his luck for their glimpse and began narrating the story of his ugly demon 
body. 


Page 32 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


3-71 Autobiography of Kabandh ( 34 / 2329) 

Kabandh narrated his story, “I was well built and handsome like moon and sun. I used to 
pester sages for fun. Once I assumed a deadly form and scared the sage Sthulshira. He 
became angry and cursed me to remain in the deadly form of a demon. When I prayed 
him, he assured my emancipation by Ram. Later, with my hard penance I pleased 
Brahma. He blessed me long life. Once I had an encounter with Indr. He pounded his 
vajr over me, which drove my legs and head inside my body. When I prayed Indr, he 
blessed me with one yojan long arms and created mouth in my belly. He also assured 
my salvation from Ram.” 

Submitting thus, he requested Ram to arrange for his cremation so that he may get back 
his previous excellent celestial body, and then I would give you location of such a person 
who would help you in locating your wife. 

When curious Ram enquired about the location of Sita, Kabandh replied, “Before 
cremation I can’t tell you anything because my celestial senses are not retrieved. Once 
you cremate me I would be able to help you. 

3-72 Kabandh cremated (27 / 2356) 

Soon both the brothers pushed him in a big ditch and lit fire around him. His body burnt, 
and there arose a celestial being dressed in excellent cloth decorated with ornaments. 
He rode a chariot drawn by royal swan, and from the sky he addressed Ram, “There are 
six strategy of prosperity: sandhi, vigrah, yan, aasan, dwaidhibhav , and samashrya. At 
the moment you are in distress due to loss of your wife. You should try to make 
friendship with person of similar category who is also in distress. There is one valiant 
monkey, called Sugriv who stays at Rishyamuk spread over to pampa sarovar. He is 
accompanied by four friends, and he has been tortured and banished by his brother Vali. 
You should forge friendship with Sugriv. He is son of sun god from riksharaja, and over 
the globe no place is unknown to him. He is a warrior, strong and capable. Keeping fire 
in witness, you should establish your friendship with him, and he would find out the exact 
location of Sita.” 

3-73 Pampa sarovar and rishyamuk mountain (46 / 2402) 

Staying up in the sky, mounting the celestial chariot, Kabandh gave details of movement 
to lake pampa and mountain rishyamuk. He mentioned, “Due west from here is forests 
of plenty of fruit bearing trees. Keep crossing them one after another. You will reach 
pampa lake where birds keep on chirping. The bank and bed of the lake doesn’t have 
pinching pebbles or slippery soil. The presence of sandy soil has made it more 
comfortable. You will enjoy offering delicious fruits from the surrounding area, to the 
varieties of fish ( rohu , vakratund , and nalmeen ) swimming in the lake water. Water of 
this lake is scented with the fragrance of lotus flower. While you will enjoy playing with 
the fish, Lakshaman may offer you palatable and lotus fragrant water of the lake in the 
bowl made from the leaves of lotus. Water is crystal clear, and has curative 


Page 33 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


characteristics against several diseases. In the evening mighty monkeys land on the 
bank of the lake to take water. They stay in the caves of the surrounding mountains. You 
may see red and blue lotus flowers deep inside water. Those flowers are inaccessible 
and they remain fresh and never wither out. It is said to serve Matang muni, scores of 
sages had settled there. They used to carry fruits and flowers for the sage. The sweat 
drops from their body had caused the flower bearing plants and they never dry or wither 
out. Now you will not find those sages, but Shabri attendant to those sages still stay 
there. She is always engaged in the righteous deeds. Upon your glimpse, she will depart 
to heaven because you are ever respected and glorified 7 (3-73-27 fcfi ^ ^ 
by all the beings. 

On the western bank of pampa you may have a look at rare ashram not visible to 
ordinary beings. Due to the glory of the sage Matang, elephants never trespass that 
ashram. The forest there is known after the sage Matang. 

On the east of pampa is rishyamuk parvat (mountain,). Because of snakes and small 
elephants, It is tough to climb this mountain. It is said to be created by Brahma. Those 
who dream over this mountain realize the same when awoke. The sinners are equally 
penalized by the demons over here. The trumpeting of elephants staying in matang van 
are heard at top of rishyamuk. 

There is cave at the top of rishyamuk which is closed by a heavy rock mass. On the 
eastern side of the cave there is a lovely pond and grove of fruit bearing trees, and 
Sugriv stays there. He also comes out and enjoys the open top of the mountain.” 

Describing thus the details of travel, Kabandh advised Ram to go there and forge 
friendship with Sugriv which would be very beneficial for him. Ram and Lakshaman, 
before they departed, wished to Kabandh, “Depart for your celestial abode now.” 

3-74 Ram with Shabari (35 / 2437) 

As indicated by Kabandh, Ram and Lakshaman continued their journey to pampa and 
before reaching there they stayed on way at one mountain. On the west of pampa they 
visited the ashram of shabari. She offered revered saluation to them, and treated them 
with water of padya, arghya and achamniyam (to wash feet, hands and mouth) and 
varieties of delicious fruits. When Ram enquired about her spiritual progress, she 
responded positively. She asserted, “When I see you here, I take it as success to all my 
penance.” Shabari mentioned, “When you were at Chitrakoot, my mentors left for the 
divine abode. While departing they assured me about your arrival here with your brother 
Lakshaman. I am very fortunate to see you here now as a consequence of my life long 
effort.” 


7 Another categorical expression emphasizing supreme divinity of Ram. 


Page 34 of 35 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Aranya kand 


Ram expressed his desire to visit the ashram of her mentors. She gladly took him 
around and mentioned, “See the surrounding forest, it is called matang van. My mentors 
used to offer fire oblation here. When they became very weak due to advanced aged, 
this altar was used to offer flower to gods. This altar still glows with brilliance. When they 
were not able to move, their concern brought forth the appearance of a pond called 
saptsagar theerth, which has water from all the seven oceans. After bath, the bark and 
loin cloth put by them for drying in air are still here. The worship garlands made by them 
using lotus flowers are still afresh.” 

Describing thus, Shabari expressed her wish to depart to the world of her mentor sages. 
Ram approved her proposal and she offered her physical form to the fire and got 
transformed into divine form with divine apparel. She moved to her cherished divine 
abode of the sages. 

3-75 Ram at pampa sarovar (30 / 2467) 

Ram and Lakshaman appreciated the sacred ashram of the sages and the saptsagar 
theeth. In that theerth, they offered water oblation to their forefathers. Thereafter, with 
an excitement to meet Sugriv they left for pampa sarovar. On the other side of the lake 
was rishyamuk where Sugriv was staying. Ram with Lakshaman enjoyed the natural 
scene surrounding pampa. Its water was crystal clear showing distinctly the sand bed 
below. The varieties of flowers had magnified the charm of the lake. The mosaic of 
colours had been created by the presence of red louts, white kumud (lilies), and blue 
lotus. To attain relaxation, Ram got into pampa water. The pleasing scene surrounding 
pampa drove his mind to Sita, and her memory made him sad again. 


Page 35 of 35 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : 


Kishkindha kand 


Srimate Ramanuiav namah 

Preface 

This fourth submission depicting Kishkindha kand , presenting condensed Valmiki Ramayan, is in 
sequence of earlier three submissions of Bal, Ayodhya, and Arnya. 

This kand is unique in presenting graphic description of global geography, covering trees, 
animals, forests, mountains, rivers and lakes. Continuing from Arnay kand, one can have idea of 
ancient kishkindha, near Hampi in Karnataka, India. 

There are 67 sarg in this kand. They consist of total 2362 Sanskrit shlok. The shlok in earlier three 
submissions had been 9,043 and putting this fourth one of Kishkindha together, the sum total 
goes to 11,405 for initial four kand of Valmiki Ramayan. 

The divinity of Hanuman (variously known as Anjaneya) is revealed in last two sarg of 66 and 67. 
Before one embarks upon studying sundar kand, it is essential to go through kishkindha also. 


Srimann Narayan Charnau Sharnam Prapaddye. 


Submission: 


Srikrishna Prapnnachari 
January 27, 2010 


i 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : 


Kishkindha kand 


Contents 

page 

4-1 Pampa to rishyamuk (130/130) 1 

4-2 Scared Sugriv (29 / 159) 1 

4-3 Hanuman - a mendicant (39 / 198) 2 

4-4 Hanuman carried Ram and Lakshaman to rishyamuk (35 / 233) 2 

4-5 Ram with Sugriv (31 / 264) 3 

4-6 Sugriv with Sita’s jewels (27 / 291) 3 

4-7 Sugriv consoled Ram (25 / 316) 4 

4-8 Sugriv repeated his sorrow (46 / 362) 4 

4-9 Sugriv narrated the incident (26 / 388) 5 

4-10 Incident elaborated (35 /423) 5 

4-11 Mighty Vali (93 / 516) 6 

4-12 Sugriv challenged Vali (42 / 558) 7 

4-13 Saptajan ashram (seven sages’ hermitage 30/ 588) 8 

4-14 Sugriv threatened Vali (22 / 610) 8 

4-15 Tara’s noble advice ( 31 / 641) 8 

4-16 Vali grounded (39 / 680) 9 

4-17 Critical Vali (54 / 734) 9 

4-18 Apologetic Vali (66 / 800) 10 

4-19 Arrival of Angad and Tara (28 / 828) 10 

4-20 Wailing Tara (26 / 854) 10 

4-21 Hanuman consoled Tara (16 / 870) 11 

4-22 Vali’s ultimate departure (32 / 902) 11 

4-23 Lamenting Tara (30 / 932) 12 

4-24 Grieved Sugriv (44 / 976) 12 


ii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : 


Kishkindha kand 


4-25 Last rites of Vali (54 / 1030) 13 

4-26 Crowning of Sugriv and Angad (42 / 1072) 13 

4-27 Ram at Prasravan mount (48 / 1120) 14 

4-28 Period of rains (66 / 1186) 15 

4-29 Neel to gather monkeys (33 / 1219) 16 

4-30 Sharad months and Lakshaman to Sugriv (85 / 1304) 17 

4-31 Lakshaman on way to Kishkindha ( 51 / 1355) 17 

4-32 Hanuman counseled Sugriv (22 / 1377) 18 

4-33 Tara calmed down Lakshaman (66 / 1443) 19 

4-34 Sugriv rose to Lakshaman (19 / 1462) 20 

4-35 Tara pacified Lakshaman (23 / 1485) 20 

4-36 Apologetic Sugriv (20 / 1505) 21 

4-37 Monkeys sent for again (37 / 1542) 21 

4-38 Sugriv with Ram (34 / 1476) 22 

4-39 Arrival of monkeys (44 / 1520) 23 

4-40 Monkeys dispatched to the east (71 / 1591) 23 

4-41 Most trusted Team to the south (49 / 1640) 25 

4-42 Team to the west (58 / 1698) 26 

4-43 Team to the north (62 / 1760) 27 

4-44 Hanuman carried Ram’s ring (17 / 1777) 28 

4-45 Monkeys expressed their confidence (17 / 1794) 28 

4-46 Sugriv narrated his wandering (24 / 1818) 29 

4-47 Monkeys couldn’t find Sita (14 / 1832) 29 

4-48 Southern monkeys on quest (24 / 1856) 29 

4-49 Encouragement by Angad and Gandhamadan (22 / 1878) 29 

4-50 Monkeys in a mysterious cave (41 / 1919) 30 

iii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : 


Kishkindha kand 


4-51 Monkeys treated with food (19 / 1938) 30 

4-52 Monkeys out from the cave (32 / 1970) 30 

4-53 Angad proposed suicidal fast (27 / 1997) 31 

4-54 Hanuman persuaded the monkeys (22 / 2019) 31 

4-55 Angad accompanied on fast (23 / 2042) 31 

4-56 Scared monkeys and Sampati (24 / 2066) 32 

4-57 Angad helped Sampati (19 / 2085) 32 

4-58 Sampati revealed Sita’s place (37 / 2122) 33 

4-59 Sampathi narrated more about Sita and Ravan (28/ 2150) 34 

4-60 Autobiography of Sampathi (1) (21/2171) 34 

4-61 Autobiography of Sampathi . . . (2) . . . .continued (17 / 2188) 34 

4-62 Autobiography of Sampathi . . . (3) . . . .continued (15 / 2203) 35 

4-63 Autobiography of Sampathi... (4).... continued (15 / 2218) 35 

4-64 How to cross the sea (22 / 2240) 36 

4-65 Hanuman approached (35 / 2275) 36 

4-66 Jambvan encouraged Hanuman (38 / 2313) 36 

4-67 Hanuman in readiness (49 / 2362) 37 


IV 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Srimate Ramanujaya namah 

Kishkindha kaand 
(67 sarg) 


4-1 Pampa to rishyamuk (130/130) 

Pampa had an attractive natural canvas. The fruit and flower bearing trees were loaded 
with delicious and fragrant yields. Birds and animals enjoyed the cool and fragrant 
breeze. Water of pampa was clear and scented with varieties of floating lotuses. 

The breeze of chaitra 1 (4-1-10/36, chaitra is also called pushp mas or surbhi mas which 
means month of flowers and fragrance) month digs deep into the affectionate emotions 
of a young couple. Ram was not an exception, and he got into the grip of sweet memory 
of Sita at panchavati. The lotuses represented various limbs of Sita (face, eyes, hands) 
and her favourite fragrances. Lamenting the absence of Sita, and imagining her probable 
plight in the hands of the demon, Ram reminded Lakshaman, “Being at pampa if Sita 
joins back, I would never go to Ayodhya for such a rare naturally rich environment is 
hardly available anywhere else.” 

Being encouraged by Lakshaman, Ram mustered his patience and composing back to 
the objective of locating Sita, he moved towards rishyamuk. Sugriv, while roaming 
around, had a view of Ram and Lakshaman approaching his hiding place. He grew 
apprehensive of enemy’s (Vali’s) plot against him. Zone of Matang ashram was a safe 
place for the monkeys persecuted by Vali (hit# ), and therefore, Sugriv and other 
monkeys were staying around pampa and rishyamuk. 

4-2 Scared Sugriv (29 / 159) 

All the monkeys who saw Ram and Lakshaman moving towards the shelter of Sugriv, 
moved quickly to Sugriv. Sugriv and his companions had an apprehension of those two 
bow men to be representative of Vali. Hanuman, staying with them spoke, “I don’t see 
any reason to be panicked. In fact, by inherence monkeys have unstable mind. First be 
calm, and then let us see, who are they?. This hill top is called malay and is safe against 
the action zone of Vali.” 

Sugriv advised Hanuman, “These bow-men have long arms and attractive rare 
personality. Weapons with them, speak of their valiance. They may be sent by Vali to 
eliminate us. However, first we need to find out and you should go to them as a 
commoner. Keeping your face towards us, you should talk to them to find out their aim of 
visiting this area.” 


1 

When Ram raised ashram at panchavati, it was sharad (sifknr ) season, and once in succeeding season of 
hemant (Iro imfr Arnya kand sarg 16, shlok -1) when he went to Godavari for bath, Lakshaman made a graphic 
description of the effect of hemant (cold) on the natural environment. Here at pampa, chaitra mas has been described for 
its cool and fragrant breeze. 


Page 1 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-3 Hanuman - a mendicant (39 / 198) 

Hanuman gladly moved towards Ram. He was in a guise of a mendicant. Coming closer 
to them, he paid his deep respect to them. Praising their charming physique, Hanuman 
spoke, “Both of you have a divine qualities. Looking valiant, equipped with weapons, the 
ascetics bark has enhanced your personality. Long arms and lotus eyes provide visual 
delight. Although you don’t wear jewels, but your body is fit for them. In both of you, to 
me it seems, I see moon and sun coming together on this earth. How did you come in 
this tough and rugged mountainous forest ? Are you some of the gods ? 

With your arrival the charm of this area has been enhanced. The bows you carry are not 
ordinary, they are marked with gold carvings. The quivers over your shoulder are full of 
rare quality of arrows. Your swords have golden handle. All of these, suggest something 
special with you. 

With my repeated queries I await your response. Sugriv, a righteous and valiant monkey, 
stays here. He had been unfairly banished by his brother, and he roams around for 
shelter. I have been sent by him to you. My name is Hanuman. I am also a monkey. You 
may consider me his counselor. Sugriv wants to forge friendship with you. I am son of 
wind god. I am capable of changing my form, and my current form of a mendicant is to 
understand your identity for the benefit of Sugriv. 

When Hanuman became silent, Ram spoke to Lakshaman, “He is secretary to Sugriv. 
He appears to be knower of yaju, rik, and sam veda (4-3-28). Grammar is in his 
command. He spoke so eloquently that I am highly impressed by him. Lakshaman, 
Please respond to him positively.” 

As desired by Ram, Lakshaman spoke to Hanuman, “I have come across the qualities of 
Sugriv. We, both brothers, have arrived here in search of Sugriv. Your proposal to have 
friendship with Sugriv is acceptable to us and we can do that." 

4-4 Hanuman carried Ram and Lakshaman to rishyamuk (35 / 233) 

Hanuman was glad with the developments and it occurred to his mind, “The indications 
are favourable to Sugriva. These bow men also have special interest in Sugriv. It seems 
Sugriv would soon get back his state.” 

Hanuman spoke to Ram, “rishyamuk has tough forest terrain, why did you come here?” 
on the indication of Ram, Lakshaman mentioned, “There had been a valiant king 
Dasarth who had been famous for his good and welfare activities by way of performing 
several ygya. This person here with you, is the eldest son of Dasarath, and his name is 
Ram. He being the eldest among four sons of the king, has all praiseworthy qualities. 
When he was to be crowned as successor prince of the king, there arose some obstacle, 
and he had been banished to forest. He was joined in forest by his wife Sita, and me, his 
younger brother, Lakshaman as his attendant. Unfortunately, a demon abducted his wife 
Sita, and in search of Sita, we met a demon named Danu (4-4-14) (refer Amya kand, 


Page 2 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


sarg 70 / 71, Kabandh), who under curse had become a demon. He told us to contact 
Sugriv who would be helpful in locating Sita.” 

When Lakshaman completed his purpose of visit, Hanuman with tears in his eyes 
welcome them and mentioned, “Sugriv was in need of you. It is his good luck that you 
came here on your own. His brother, Vali, has disowned him from his share of kingdom, 
and grabbed his wife. He has been banished and is in need of support. Along with me, 
he would be able to locate Sita. Let us now move to Sugriv." 

When they moved towards rishyamuk, Hanuman restored his original form of the 
monkey. He carried both the brothers on his shoulders (4-4-34) to rishyamuk. 

4-5 Ram with Sugriv (31 / 264) 

Placing Ram and Lakshaman at rishyamuk, Hanuman went to malay hill (a part of 
rishyamuk ) where Sugriv was staying. He spoke to Sugriv, “These bow men are sons of 
Dasarath who had been renowned for his thousands of ygya and for precious charities of 
gems, gold, and cows to Brahmins. The eldest is Ram, and the younger is Lakshaman. 
To honour the words of father given to queen Kaikeyi, Ram came to live in forest. He 
has been accompanied by his wife Sita and brother Lakshaman. Ravan abducted Sita 
and they have come to seek your help to locate Sita. I would propose that if you consider 
it proper, have a friendship with him, and this will be beneficial for you as well.” 

Sugriva, immediately came to Ram and offered his hands of friendship, “I am fortunate, 
and having friendship with you, my position would be elevated since I am a monkey and 
you are a human being.” 

Ram spreading his hands, grabbed Sugirv’s hands, and embraced him. Hanuman lit fire 
after rubbing two wooden pieces, and both, Ram and Sugriv gave round to fire as a 
mark of witness of fire god in forging of their friendship.” 

Sugriv brought a soft tree branch, and sit over that with Ram. Hanuman also gave a 
sandal wood branch with flowers to Lakshaman to sit. Sugriv mentioned, “My elder 
brother Vali has become very cruel to me. Dispossessing me from state, he forcibly 
grabbed my wife. I am alone and facing unending calamity.” 

Indicating to his bow and arrows Ram pledged to eliminate Vali, and restore his right in 
state and his wife. 

4-6 Sugriv with Sita’s jewels (27 / 291) 

When they sat together, Sugriv spoke to Ram, “When you and Lakshaman were not 
present, Ravan stole away Sita. He killed Jatayu. I swear, it would be my bounden duty 
to find out Sita, where she is kept, either in netherworld or up in sky. She is like a poison 
mixed in a food, and no one can digest her. I would retrieve her as ved was earlier 
retrieved from demons.” 


Page 3 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Committing his vow, he further revealed, “One day, I with my four ministers were sitting 
outside. We heard cry of a woman, hey, Ram !, hey, Lashaman !. Being grabbed in the 
lap of Ravan, she dropped her jewels wrapped in a cloth. I am sure those jewels belong 
to Sita.” 

Excited Ram, asked Sugriv to hurry up, and show him her materials. Sugriv brought 
them from a cave. When Ram had a look at them, he fell in grief, with tear in his eyes. 
Indicating to Lakshaman he spoke, “See, how Sita had dropped her jewels." 

When Lakshaman had a look, he spoke, “I am not aware of the armlet and earrings, 
since I never saw Sita above her feet. I do know these anklets, for I had been offering 
regularly my salutation to her lotus feet. “ 

Ram anxiously enquired from Sugriv, “In which direction she was taken by the demon?. I 
would eliminate the entire demon race for the fault of only one demon. O, king among 
monkeys! Help me in locating Sita, and I would soon send that demon to the death 
world." 

4-7 Sugriv consoled Ram (25 / 316) 

When Sugriv found Ram lamenting with tearful eyes, he consoled him, “I am not aware 
of the secret abode and lineage of that demon. But I promise to find out Sita and retrieve 
her back to you. With help of monkeys’ army I would kill the demons contingent and fulfill 
the aim of getting back Sita.” 

Continuing further, Sugriv advised Ram, “Never lament, have courage and demonstrate 
patience. Being a monkey, I am much inferior to you, but I never lose my heart for my 
wife. It is patience which pays ultimately. Being a friend, I would like to see you in a 
healthy state of mind." 

Hearing Sugriv, Ram got a shot in the arm, and wiping tears from his face he spoke to 
him, “I am grateful to you for this precious advice. Let us plan our future actions. I have 
promised to eliminate cruel Vali from your path. I am adherent to truth, and would never 
back out from my words.” 

4-8 Sugriv repeated his sorrow (46 / 362) 

Sugriv got satisfied with the assuring words of Ram. Next day, when they were watching 
the forest from the hill top, Sugriv broke a soft branch of sal and asked Ram to take his 
seat on that. Hanuman also gave a similar branch to Laskhaman for sitting. 

Sugriv spoke to Ram, “My elder brother grabbed my wife, deposed me from princely 
seat, but still carries enmity against me. I am not able to understand, how my woes will 
end. He had been sending several moneys to kill me. When I first saw you, I was 
mistaken for you to be his agent.” 

Sugriv’s eyes were full of tears, but controlling them he kept talking to Ram. Ram again 
repeated his vow, “Today I would kill that idiot who had caused so much misery upon 


Page 4 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


you. In order to assess the strength and weaknesses of both of you, I would like to know 
in detail the reason of rivalry between you and him.” 

4-9 Sugriv narrated the incident (26 / 388) 

Sugriva narrated the incident which lead to the rivalry between the two brothers, “Vali is 
my elder and we are two brothers from our father Rikshraja. When my father died, Vali 
being elder was crowned the king of the great state of our father. I had been assisting 
him as a regal functionary. 

There was a demon called Mayavi, he was son of Maya Danav, and elder brother of 
Dundubhi. Because of some woman, Vali and Mayavi became enemy to each other. 
Once, at late night, Mayavi came threatenig Vali to Kishkindha. Vali couldn’t bear his 
challenge, and despite being dissuaded by palace women, he came out to settle score 
with Mayavi. I also came out to assist him. Seeing both of us, Mayavi took to heels. Vali 
chased him, and I also followed them. The moon lit night facilitated our pursuit of 
chasing the demon. 

There was a narrow cave, and the demon Mayavi disappeared into that. Vali also 
followed him, asking me with swear of his feet, to stay outside. One year passed, and 
there was no news, still I was on the door of the cave all along. I was anxious to go 
inside, but then I saw stream of blood with foam coming outside. Thereafter, I heard the 
roaring of the demon. I mistook as the end of Vali, and came back to Kishkindha by 
putting a rock mass at the door of the cave. I didn’t wish to divulge the incident, but 
somehow it leaked out, and I was crowned as king in absence of Vali. After sometime, 
Vali came out, and coming to Kishkindha, he saw me on throne. He became angry. I 
saluted sincerely on his feet, keeping the crown in his service, he didn’t relent and 
maintained his full rage against me." 

4-10 Incident elaborated (35 /423) 

Sugriv further elaborated, “When Vali came back, I offered back his kingdom, and 
assumed the position of his attendant. He called a meeting of the ministers and blamed 
me guilty. He mentioned that it took him one year in locating the demon inside the cave 
and thereafter he killed all his kith and kin. When he tried to come out, he found the exit 
closed, and on shouting my name he didn’t get any response. He considered this act of 
mine as a severe fault, because I didn’t stay there until his return. The closing the entry 
by rock mass was another fault which hurt his feelings. Thereafter, he ordered me to 
leave the kingdom. I had only one cloth on my body, and I was not allowed for any more. 
He grabbed my wife, and alone I had to run here and there for shelter. Lastly, I came to 
this hill where he can’t come because of curse.” 

Hearing the narration from Sugriv, Ram again assured him to eliminate Vali by his single 
deadly arrow. 


Page 5 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-11 Mighty Vali (93 / 516) 

Hearing the vow of Ram to kill Vali with one arrow, Sugriv felt satisfied. He wanted to 
acquaint Ram with the great potential of Vali. He mentioned to Ram, “I can understand, 
you are capable of destroying the entire world, but let me acquaint you with the great 
potential of Vali, which will enable you to decide further course of action. He is so strong 
that every morning before sunrise, he visits east sea to west sea, from south ocean to 
extreme north and never gets tired.” 

There was a mighty demon in form of a buffalo and he was called Dundubhi. His body 
was huge like a rain fed cloud, and high like a mountain. Once he went to sea and 
challenged the sea god for wrestling. Sea god surrendered before him and said, “You 
may try with the Himalaya." He arrived at the Himalaya and caused damages of trees 
and tossed the rocks up and down. When the god of Himalaya appeared, he asked for 
duel fight. He stood with folded hands and spoke to the demon, “I am a shelter place of 
saints. I am not able to face you in wrestling. I advise you to try with Vali, son of Indr, at 
Kishkindha.” 

Dundubhi came to Kishkindha and with roaring sound he invited Vali for fight. Vali never 
tolerated any body’s challenge. It was night time, and he was inside the palace. The 
demon spoke, “I grant you tonight to enjoy, and you may face me in the morning. 
Tonight is the last night for your pleasure. You may decide your inheritor before you 
come out to face me.” Vali ignoring his utterances, appeared on the scene, and taking 
him by his horns, lifted his body up in air, giving a few rounds dashed him on ground. 
The ears of the demon began bleeding. The demon got up, and both were engaged in 
fierce fighting. Vali took him several times up and dashed down on ground. The demon 
was getting weaker, but Vali felt increasingly more confident. Ultimately, Vali dashing 
him heavily on ground, pressed him down hard with his feet. The demon was crushed, 
causing all his veins bursting out with blood, and soon he died. Seeing him dead, Vali 
lifted his huge body with his two hands and threw it one yojan away in the forest. 

While doing this some drops of blood fell over the ashram of Matang muni. When the 
sage noticed this, he came out and saw a huge body of a dead demon which had 
spoiled some of the tree around there. From his saintly power, he could come to know 
that vali had done that. He cursed, “Since my ashram has been defiled by this act of the 
monkey, as a result I curse him that If he enters into this forest, he would lose his life. I 
also forewarn his supporter monkeys to vacate this forest by tomorrow, otherwise I 
would pronounce deadly curse on them also. I have reared the trees in this forest like my 
children; one yojan area around my ashram also shall be out of bounds for Vali." 

The monkey supporters of Vali informed him about the curse of the sage. He rushed with 
folded hands to the sage begging his kind mercy, but the sage didn’t listen, and quietly 
entered into his ashram. 


Page 6 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Sugriv mentioned, “This area is barred to Vali’s movement, and therefore, I stay here, 
but always I am scared of his plans against me. You heard about his great potential and 
I have doubt about his defeat.” 

Hearing Sugriv’s narration and concern, Lakshaman laughed and spoke to him, “In your 
opinion, which act would testify that Ram would kill Vali.” 

Sugriv showed seven tall and huge sal trees and mentioned, “Vali can shake each of 
them so vigorously that they can become leafless. Previously he had pierced each of 
them several times. Ram, you have now to decide how you would be able to kill him. I 
am scared of his strength and therefore, I never go beyond this rishyamuk. I haven’t 
seen your performances, and therefore, I may be talking like an ignorant. My intention is 
never to show you inferior to Vali, but make you fully aware of his great strength. I would 
prefer that Ram should try to hurl the skeleton of Dundhubhi with his toe at least two 
hundred bows length away.” 

Laughing, Ram assured Sugriv again, “My friend, my shaft will itself demonstrate my 
strength. I need not talk about that.” 

However to generate confidence in him, using his toe, he hurled the bone skeleton ten 
yojan away. Seeing this, Sugriv mentioned, “Vali was tired when he threw this dead body 
after killing the demon, and it was heavy also because it was fresh and wet with blood 
and flesh. Now it has become much lighter for it has gone dry, and only bones are 
remaining. There is a lot of difference between then and now. I am still doubtful of his 
strength. If you try on these sal trees my doubts might be cleared.” 

4-12 Sugriv challenged Vali (42 / 558) 

Ram took out one shaft and loading on his bow charged that over the sal trees. The 
shaft piercing through all the seven trees went forward tearing the hills and netherworld 
and returned back safely to Ram. 

Sugriv became glad to see his potential and became confident that Vali would be easily 
killed by him. He praised Ram, “No one in this creation would be able to face you, 
neither Mahendra, nor Varun. Vali is insignificant before your capability. I am sure he is 
now finished.” 

Ram took him immediately to Kishkindha. Hearing his roaring before his palace, Vali 
rushed out, and both were engaged in fierce wrestling. Ram stood hiding behind a tree 
with a shaft and bow in his hand. Both the brothers were so identical, that Ram couldn’t 
decide, and he didn’t charge his arrow. Scared of losing his life, Sugrv lastly ran away 
and entered the Matang van. Vali chased him, but he couldn’t enter the prohibited forest 
for fear of curse of the sage. 

Ram and Lakshaman came searching Sugriv in that forest. Sugriv critically spoke to 
Ram, “If you didn’t want to kill him, why did you threw me in that death trap.” Ram tried 
to convince him as to why he couldn’t kill Vali, “Both of you are so identical that I couldn’t 


Page 7 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


differentiate you from Vali, and therefore for fear of committing a mistake, I didn’t charge 
the deadly arrow.” 

He asked Lakshaman to put a garland around his neck so that he could be differentiated 
from Vali. Lakshaman uprooted gajpushpi creeper and put that around Sugriv’s neck for 
proper identification. Finally they moved to Kishkindha again. 

4-13 Saptajan ashram (seven sages’ hermitage 30/ 588) 

While moving towards Kishkindha, Sugriv was ahead of all. Ram followed him, and 
Lakshaman was behind Ram. In the rear Hanuman, Nal, Neel, and Tar (cfTT chief of 
monkeys army) were moving following Lakshaman. On way Ram observed several 
ponds having several kinds of fragrant flowers. Birds and animals had enhanced the 
surrounding of dense rows of trees and lush green grass fields. 

Ram spotted one attractive place which had several rows of impregnable trees encircled 
by banana plants. On enquiry from Sugriv, he learnt, “The entire large area is an 
ashram earlier graced by seven sages who had meditated at this place for seven 
hundred years. They used to maintain head down, and sustained their life on air only. 
They had departed bodily to heaven. Still we hear musical and dance tunes coming from 
inside. Evening sky witnesses the oblation smoke over the tree lines. No one can enter 
this zone, and if someone tried, he never returned. This place is called saptajan 
ashram." 

Sugriv advised him to offer respect to those sages from outside which always fetch 
auspiciousness. Ram and Lakshaman offered their respect with folded hands from 
outside. 

Moving ahead they reached Kishkindha. 

4-14 Sugriv threatened Vali (22 / 610) 

Arriving at Kishkindha, those accompanying Sugriv occupied hiding places behind trees 
of larger girth. Ram spoke to Sugriv, “You need to hurl challenge to Vali. He had earlier 
been victorious, and he never tolerates someone’s threat. Hearing your voice, he will 
come out. You have seen, how using a single arrow seven huge sal trees were 
threaded. Similarly, today single arrow will cause Vali to mortally lie down on ground. 
The distinctive gajapushpi garland around your neck would differentiate Vali from you. “ 
Encouraged by Ram, Sugriv produced a deafening roar driving birds and animals away 
from that zone. 

4-15 Tara’s noble advice ( 31 / 641) 

When Vali stormed out to quell Sugriv’s lion-roar, Tara followed her and interfering on 
his way submitted, “Kindly contain you rage. Earlier also Sugriv threatened you, but 
being thrashed by you he took shelter in Matang van. Again his quick come back 
threatening you has made me anxious. The other day, Angad was in the forest, and he 


Page 8 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


got updates from other monkeys which he told me. Two valiant humans, Ram and 
Lakshaman, said to be price of Ayodhya, in the family of Ikshavaku, have arrived here. 
Ram is said to be repository of noble qualities as the Himalaya is for precious metals. He 
is shelter of helpless, adherent to truth, and obedient to his father. Sugriv has won their 
favour. Be sympathetic to Sugriv. Crown him as prince, who had always served you with 
sincerity. He is your loving and obedient brother. Discard your enmity against him. I 
hardly find such a complying brother like Sugriv in this world. 

4-16 Vali grounded (39 / 680) 

Vali didn’t heed to Tara, and spoke to her, “How could I tolerate the lion-like threatening 
roar to me? Showing back to enemy in battlefield has never been my way of life. I can’t 
allow someone threatening me. Righteous Ram won’t commit any sin. I understand your 
emotion to me. You need to get back with other women. I see you closely coming with 
me. Please don’t do this. I will not allow Sugriv roaring like this. I would only thrash him, 
and would never kill him. I am sure under my impulsive pounding, Sugriv would soon 
take to heels. I stand obliged to you for enlightening me on mental level.” 

Tara was an enlightened and knowledgeable woman. With an aim to earn his victory in 
the combat, she recited auspicious swasti mantr (4-16-12) giving a round of her 
husband, Vali. When Tara entered inner palace, Vali rushed out of the city like an angry 
snake hissing deeply. He located Sugriv tight with his loin cloth. Vali also firmly secured 
his loin cloth, and with a clenched fist plunged over Sugriv. They exchanged pounding 
over each other. Due to Vali’s punch, Sugriv began bleeding through his mouth. Both 
picked up fierce fighting. Sugriv uprooting a sal tree bounced over Vali. This injured Vali 
and he was shaken like a wave surfing boat, but they continued the combat of pounding 
each other. Sugriv felt to be weaker than Vali, and looked around seeking help. Sensing 
Sugriv’s losing heart, Ram charged his deadly shaft over Vali. 

Hurt by Ram’s arrow, Vali fell on ground, and was bathed in his own blood. He looked 
like the grounded symbolic flag, indr-dhwaj of ashwin purnima (full moon night). 

4-17 Critical Vali (54 / 734) 

When Vali fell flat on ground, and was about to depart, Ram and Lakshaman came to 
him. As soon as they offered their respect to him, Vali spoke, “My wife Tara had 
dissuaded me in coming to fight today. I assured her Ram is righteous and with no fault 
of mine he would never act against me. You proved me wrong. Your reputation of being 
truthful and fair has been tarnished by this act of killing me from a hiding. The royal 
qualities of patience, pardon, mercy, righteousness and valiance appear to be a fagade 
in you. You appear like an ascetic but your deeds are opposite in nature. I compare you 
with that deceptive well which is kept covered with grass and straw stems. Among five 
nailed creatures, the skin and flesh of monkey are untouchable. If you killed me to seek 
favour of Sugriv for locating your wife Sita, you could have asked me. By this time, I 
would have brought not only Sita before you, but I would have produced Ravan tied in a 
rope before you. Even if Sita would have been in deep sea, I would have retrieved her 


Page 9 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


as bhagwan haygreev (4-17-51) had recovered scriptures from the demons. If you have 
answers to my allegations, please come forward.” 

4-18 Apologetic Vali (66 / 800) 

Ram reminded Vali, “Ikshavaku house is the ruler of this earth. Bharat is the present 
king, and we are his representative. We have authority to punish the violators of code of 
conduct established by age old scriptures. I understand, you are a sinner who banished 
his brother and grabbed his wife. Your lustful association with Ruma (wife of Sugriv) is 
shear violation of dharma. Elder brother, teacher and father are to be respected alike. 
The younger brother, son and able disciple command equal affection. The wife of 
younger brother is like daughter in law and you have willfully violated this provision of 
scripture. Having punished you, I didn’t violate our code of conduct. The primordial 
among humans, Manu (4-18-30) has set forth that if a king allows the citizens to indulge 
in sinful activities, the king shall have to bear the brunt of the misdeeds of the citizen. 
Under the influence of unfounded anger you denounced me, but I don’t agree to your 
blame and I am not at fault at all.” 

Hearing the explanation of Ram, Vali apologized for his misconception and outrageous 
allegations against him. He submitted, “After my departure, I pray you to protect my son, 
Angad and my wife Tara.” Ram assured him, “Angad would continue receiving similar 
treatment and affection as you had been providing to him. Tara would enjoy safe royal 
status.” 

Vali was convinced of his assurances, and he submitted his sincere prayer to please 
Ram. 

4-19 Arrival of Angad and Tara (28 / 828) 

Vali was lying unconscious. Tara heard about his end by Ram’s arrow. Taking Angad 
with her she came out of the cave city. On way she met the panicked monkeys who 
asked her to get back to Kishkindha and crown Angad as the king. They expressed their 
apprehension of reprisals from the group of Sugriv supporters monkeys. Tara ignored 
their advice, “When my husband is no more, neither son, nor state is of any use to me.” 
She ran towards the combat site, and saw Vali in a pitiable departing condition. She saw 
Ram standing taking support of his bow. By his side, Lakshaman and Sugriv were 
present. Seeing Tara and Angad rushing straight to unconscious Vali, Sugriv got greatly 
grieved. 

4-20 Wailing Tara (26 / 854) 

She reminded Vali of his great strength, who never cared for mighty elephants and 
mountains, “How did he today lie down over ground? Have you created a city like 
Kishkindha in heaven, that you are going there? I have been enjoying several scenic 
places with you, now who will take me to those places. I tried to stop you today but you 
didn’t heed my words. It is the consequence of banishing Sugriv out of Kishkindha that 
you lost your life.” 


Page 10 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Looking towards Ram she blamed him for killing Vlai without any valid reason. She 
looked to Sugriv and spoke, “You attained what you wanted. Your enemy is now no 
more. You will enjoy the royal state as well as your wife Ruma.” 

She again turned towards Vali, “Your loveliest wife Tara is orphan today. Your several 
dear wives have lost their dear master." Hearing her lamentation, the other wives of Vali, 
held Angad, and began crying bitterly. 

Tara reminded Vali about his dear son Angad. She also begged for pardon if she had 
committed any mistake unknowingly. 

4-21 Hanuman consoled Tara (16 / 870) 

Looking her deeply immersed in grief and lying over ground, Hanuman consoled Tara, 
“This life is the consequence of our own deeds. Being a learned and knowledgeable 
woman, you should not lament like an ordinary being. It is now time to crown Angad, and 
you are the head mistress of the entire kingdom. Vali being the righteous and upright 
king had now reached heaven. There should be no lamentation for him.” 

Tara spoke addressing Hanuman, “Mother doesn’t have any role in crowning. I am no 
longer a mistress of this kingdom. When I compare thousands of Angad, with that of 
immolating myself with my husband, I find the latter one more beneficial. Sugriv being 
the uncle of Angad, is authorized for all upcoming events. For me, nothing would be 
more beneficial than follow my husband in other world.” 

4-22 Vali’s ultimate departure (32 / 902) 

Slowly vali’s vital organs were withdrawing. He saw Sugriv and beckoning him closer he 
spoke, “My brother ! It was due to my some past misdeed that I grew malignant to you. 
We lost the warmth of brotherhood. I was at fault, and I pray you to forget my misdeeds. 
See, how grieved Angad is !, he is lying unconscious over ground. Take care of him, in 
my absence. He looks like a child, but he is dependable and skilful. He will kill the 
demons and will demonstrate his excellence in the battle field. Tara, daughter of 
Sushen, is very wise, and her fine analysis of any issue is reliable. On account of her 
keen observations of the bad omens, she has the knack of forewarning in advance 
against occurrences of adverse events. She will always give you good advice.” 

Vali then offered Sugriv his golden celestial necklace, "’The golden chain around my 
neck is celestial, and before I die, I offer it to you which will fetch auspiciousness to your 
life. Once I die, and if it remains on my body, it will lose its auspiciousness.” Sugriv 
accepted that chain offered by Vali, and he put that around his neck. 

Vali addressed Angad, who stood near him, “Always be loyal and faithful to Sugriv. 
Never behave willfully and win his confidence. You own performance will win status for 
you”, and with these last words, Vali departed for another world. 


Page 11 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Seeing him dead, wail and cry rented the air. His close associates monkeys were 
immersed in grief and mentioned, “Once you fought, Golabh, gandharv continuously for 
fifteen years without any break in day or night. In the sixteenth year you killed Golabh. 
How surprising, and unbelievable is this that a person of such a mighty potential would 
leave us permanently." 

Tara embracing the dead body of Vali, fell unconscious on ground. 

4-23 Lamenting Tara (30 / 932) 

Tara lamented loudly, “You have embraced ground such that it is now dearer to you than 
me. It is the same ground, over which you caused several warriors to sleep for ever, and 
now today you have also attained the same state. One should not be married to a mighty 
king, as because of that I have prematurely been made widow. The arrow in your chest 
prevents me from embracing you closely.” 

Neel came forward and took out that deadly shaft out of Vali’s body. This caused further 
oozing out of blood from the wound, and soaked the ground deep red, as if he was lying 
on a mosaic sheet over his bed. 

Tara, holding Angad, asked him to offer last salutation to his father. When Angad offered 
his respect salute in his feet, Tara wailed, “Why you don’t bless your son today !” 

4-24 Grieved Sugriv (44 / 976) 

When Sugriv saw Tara lamenting bitterly for Vali, he also got immersed in deep grieve. 
Coming closer to Ram, he spoke, “I am a sinner that I caused the end of my brother. 
When in combat, I became unconscious by one his punches, he asked me to “go away, I 
won’t kill you”, such great was he, and I for my selfish reasons got him killed. When Indr 
(the chief of gods) killed Vritrasur, he had to do penance to get rid of the sin of killing a 
Brahmin. His sin was, thereafter, shared by earth, water, tree, and river. I don’t see any 
one who could share my sin for causing end of my own brother. Instead of becoming 
king of Kishkindha, now I feel to rise to his pyre, and end my life with him. I assure you 
that in my absence, my other associates would act sincerely to locate Sita.” 

Ram was quiet, and after a while he moved towards Tara, who was lying embracing Vali 
on ground. Seeing him coming closer, others took Tara away from Vali. When Tara saw 
Ram, getting closer to him, she spoke, “You are righteous, truthful and shelter of the 
helpless. In absence of my husband I am helpless, and I pray you to kill me using the 
same arrow which was used to kill Vali." 

Ram advised her, “You being wife of a valiant warrior, should not lament like this. Get 
above this grief. This creation has been created to face all the eventualities. No one can 
escape this. I advise you to gird up your strength and face the situation valiantly. Your 
son is bound to become the crown prince and you should bless him." 

When Ram spoke thus, she became quiet, and stopped lamenting any more. 


Page 12 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-25 Last rites of Vali (54 / 1030) 

Ram was equally grieved as Sugriv, Angad and Tara. However, he moved towards them 
and asked them, "Lamenting over the departed soul do no good to that soul. You need 
to understand that everything in this creation is under strict control of time. The 
happenings of the time are linked with the destiny. Wailing and grieving will not change 
the destiny. The inevitable can’t be deferred.” 

Lakshaman came forward and advised Sugriv, “Make quick preparations for the last rites 
of Vali. Send Angad to collect himself the essential items, viz, cloths, ghee, flowers, 
sandal wood etc.” 

While Sugriv engaged Angad for collecting the necessary items for rites, Lakshaman 
directed Tar to arrange a palanquin and able monkey carriers to carry the Vali’s body to 
the cremation ground. Tar immediately came with palanquin from Kishkindha which was 
decorate with all royal insignias. Sugriv and Angad took the dead body of Vali to 
palanquin and that was then carried by mighty monkeys to the river bank. Tara again 
wept bitterly taking Vali’s head in her lap. Other wives of Vali were weeping by the side 
of T ara. 

The pyre was made ready on the river’s bank. Angad and Sugriv laid the body over the 
pyre. Angad performed the last rite of offering fire after giving rounds to the pyre. The 
last rite was performed and thereafter they offered water tribute in the river, in respect of 
the departed soul. 

4-26 Crowning of Sugriv and Angad (42 / 1072) 

Hanuman approached Ram and submitted, “With your blessings, Sugriv has been 
restored to regal inheritance. As prescribed in the scriptures, necessary items including 
water mixed with suitable herbs have been obtained. I seek your permission to complete 
his coronation, and request you to grace the crowning occasion at Kishkindha.” Ram 
told him, “Under father’s words, I can’t enter any city or village before completion of my 
assigned fourteen years terms of the forest life.” 

Ram advised Sugriv, “Angad is an able person, and son of your elder brother. He should 
also be crowned as successor prince of the state. Both the coronations should be 
organized simultaneously. The first month of rainy season, shravan has commenced, 
and it is first of the four consecutive months of the traditional 2 rest and sleeping period of 
the year for the gods and sages during rains. During these months, I would stay on this 
hill top with Lakshaman. This place is congenial for living. Water, fresh air and lotus 


2 Chaturmas (beginning from Vishnu shyani ZTZRT ( asharah shukla dwadsi tycfri &iq%TF ) to Vishnu 

utthan fcujj (kartik shukla dwadshi <t>il rf<p 


Page 13 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


flowers are adequately available here. You should make all preparatory arrangements 
for end of Ravan in the month of Kartik , the fourth and last month of gods rest.” 

With the permission of Ram, Sugriv entered the cave city Kishkindha. He was 
surrounded by a large gathering of mighty monkeys. On his entering the cave city, he 
was accorded warm welcome by the residents. As mark of respect to the king, the 
citizens and courtiers bowed to the feet of Sugriv. Thereafter he was taken for 
coronation and treated with large umbrella, chavar, seeds, gems, herbs, locks of 
lactation trees, white flowers, white cloths, fragrant water, scented garlands, sandal, rice, 
gold, honey, ghee, curd, tiger skin, and other decorative materials to enhance the 
grandeur. Sixteen teen aged girls were holding the coronation materials. Able Brahmins 
were duly respected and treated before commencing the coronation. The fire quarter 

was made ready for offering oblation. Kush sacred grass) was spread around the 
fire quarter. After igniting the sacrificial fire, oblations were offered with scriptural 
procedures. 

Sacred water from various rivers, sacred places, and seven oceans were kept ready in 
golden pots. The respectable personalities, viz., Gaj, Gavaksh, Gavay, Sharabh, 
Gandhmadan, Maind, Dwid, Hanuman and Jambvan showered sacred water over Sugriv 
who was occupying a special golden throne. On completion of his enthronement, sky 
rented with the sound of glory of his name. 

As commanded by Ram, Sugriv immediately conducted the crowning of Angad as the 
successor prince. The citizen showered all praise over Sugriv for this auspicious work of 
crowning of Angad as prince. 

4-27 Ram at Prasravan mount (48 / 1120) 

The place where Ram and Lakshaman stayed was called prasravan mount. While 
staying there, Ram made a graphic description of the natural scene, “Our cave opens in 
south west ( nairat wr ) and is sloping down in north-east ( irm w ). In front of 
entry the large is covered with plain and leveled hard black stone. River 
(i tungbhadra ) flows not far from here. This river flows eastward as if jahnavi 
(i ganga ) flows at trikut ( himalaya ). All sorts of precious trees arjun, chandan, 
tilak, sal, tamal, atimuktak, padmak, saral and shok are present here. The river 
bank has trees: jalabenth, timid, bakul, ketak, hithal, tinish, neep, sthalbenth, and 
krutmal as if a bride is dressed up fully. The echoing melodious voice of birds, 
peacock and cuckoo is heard in the mountains. We also hear the victorious 
sound from the monkeys of Kishkindha. The water birds: royal swan and saras 
enhance the grandeur of flowing river ( tungbhadra ). This river bed being sludge 
free is known as for inhabiting several sages on its bank.” 

Although there was no dearth of fruits, roots, flowers and other natural sceneries, 
Ram stayed in apathetic state with tearful eyes. Seeing him sorrowful, 


Page 14 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Lakshaman once encouraged him, “Being a great valiant person, why are you 
seen always in grip of grieve. Grieving mind is neither auspicious, nor conducive 
to creativity. It would rather make you idle with a detraction from the main 
objective of retrieving Sita. Compared to your immense capacity of eliminating 
the entire creation in a trice, the task of handling a small fry like Ravan is 
insignificant. Let us wait for the end of this rainy period, and in the sharad 3 * 
w zRifrfa ) months with due help of Sugriv we would eliminate Ravan 

forever.” 

Ram responded with affirmative assurance, “I would no longer lament, and would 
keep my valiance to the fore.” 

4-28 Period of rains (66 / 1186) 

The onset of the period of rains was so impressive that Ram cited various 
matching examples, “(i) The evening sky in the rainy season is reddish in the 
centre with white peripheral border which is like red paste of sandal over the 
forehead of the clouds, (ii) Summer hot earth is soaked with rains as if lamenting 
Sita has tears over her hot face due to separation from me. (iii) The rains appear 
like sacred threads, and clouds like body of the young disciples whose who have 
taken position over mountains to pursue their study of vedic scriptures, (iv) Arjun 
trees surrounded by fragrant kevda bushes, with the splashes of rains and 
showers, appear like Sugriv who is being consecrated with sacred water during 
crowning ceremony, (v) The flashes of lightening appear like whip over the 
clouds who produce terrible sounds of thunder, (vi) The curving flashes of 
lightening look like tossing Sita in the lap of abductor Ravan. (vi) With the cool 
and pleasant environment, the earth has become dust free, (vii) The damaged 
routes where chariots can’t move, have paused the royal expeditions, (vii) Royal 
swans have departed to mansarovar. (ix) The hilly rivers running full, red with 
mud mixed water carrying flowers of kadamb, produce matching sound to that of 
melodious voice of dancing peacocks, (x) The cool breeze is so lovely that one is 
tempted to taste in the cup of the palms (like water), (xi) Ripe rose berries 
descend over ground like flying black bees; the ripe mangos fallen from the trees 
are in abundance to satisfy all hunger, (xii) The rivers approach to sea, as if in 
the initial days of the rainy period the slumber appears to be slowly moving to 
supreme keshava (4-28-25 ter §te tenn^RT ). (xii) The forest is celebrating the 
musical concert in the company of humming bees, freaking frogs, and drumming 
clouds, (xiii) The beauty of the forest is enhanced by unbalanced gajendr 


3 1. wfww mw mv? 2 ms w wffrw nnfifa s w wf?M 4 firfirr w m s 

cRftT JJIW f? 7IW 6 7 &W W 


Page 15 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


(elephants), glad gavendr (bulls), mighty mrigendr (lion), charming nagendr 
(mountains), quiet narendr (kings), and enjoying surendr (Indr) (4-28-43). (xiv) 
The showers of rain is like consecrating sacred water (on royal crowning 
occasion) being poured by clouds over the mountains, (xv) The rain drops 
resemble the pearls coming down from the body of celestial dancers who have 
been molested by their favourite gods, (xvi) The coming of bhadra pad month, 
has offered opportunities to Brahmins to learn recitation of sam ved. 

Recalling Ayodhya Ram mentioned, “Bharat must have collected all the materials 
for four months by the purnima (full moon day) of asharah eww ■ Saryu must 
have been in high flood, as if the teeming people is bidding farewell to me.” 

He again begins counting the ending days of rainy period, so that Sita could be 
retrieved at the earliest, “In absence of Sita I am like those rivers whose banks 
have been eroded in floods. Sugriv has been restored to his royal comforts after 
a long time, and therefore he must be given time to satisfy himself. Thereafter, he 
would definitely take up my task of finding Sita.” 

Hearing this statement of Ram, Lakshaman applauded him for demonstrating his 
patience during the period of rains. 

4-29 Neel to gather monkeys (33 / 1219) 

Hanuman observed, “The rainy months are over. The sky is clear, and in the moon lit 
night it appears as if it is anointed with sandal paste. Sugriv is engrossed in enjoying the 
royal luxuries. He is not seen monitoring the activities of ministers, and without his 
review noble ministers are honestly executing their functions. He is found to be more in 
lonely company of women. It appears he is not vigilant to the words he had given to 
Ram." 

Thinking thus, Hanuman went to Sugriv, and reminded him politely, “You are capable of 
helping the strangers. Ram had completed the tough task of killing Vali for the benefit of 
his friend. Before the time is up, and we proved delaying his mission of locating Sita, you 
must take proper initiatives. The hundreds of millions of monkeys are at your beck call. 
They need to be driven in all quarters to locate Sita either on earth or in sky. ” 

Welcoming Hanuman’s initiative, Sugriv asked Neel to take command of collecting the 
monkeys from all quarters. He commanded, “Get them all here within fifteen days. Take 
assistance of Angad, and counsel of elder and respected personalities, act immediately. 
If someone is reporting after fifteen days, he would be killed without any mercy.” Saying 
thus, he entered his inner palace. 


Page 16 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-30 Sharad months and Lakshaman to Sugriv (85 / 1304) 

The sky of post rainy period had become clear. The moon lit night was brighter and had 
comforting effects. Ram thought of Sita, “During the period of sharad, when previously 
we were together, she used to repeat exactly in same melodious tone the call of saras 
birds. She used to wake up hearing the chirping of kalhans, I wonder how would be she 
now? Alas, I move around seeing varieties of rivers, ponds, groves, forests and hills but 
in her absence I am not able to derive any pleasure from them." 

This way Ram lamented on the state of plight of Sita. Lakshaman had gone to fetch 
fruits and flowers. On coming back when he saw the pitiable grieved state of mind of 
Ram, he expressed to Ram about his own anxiety, “Your this state of grief for Sita, is not 
appreciable. You need to concentrate on the final objective and its attainment, instead of 
getting lost in grief of separation. Sita is a glowing flame, and any other person trying to 
get closer to her is bound to be burnt to ashes." 

Ram got greatly encouraged by his statement, and he further mentioned, “The dark 
black clouds are absent. The breeze carrying the fragrance of arjun and kutaj has 
become placid and quiet. We no longer hear the sound of springs, clouds, elephants and 
peacocks. The sun has begun drying up the mud, and the earth is now producing dust. 
The bulls surrounded by cows have got smeared with dust. The absence of clouds has 
caused peacocks to become quiet, and discarding their colourful wings on the river 
banks, they are retracting in oblivion as if they had been reprimanded by sarad (autumn) 
active saras birds. Since the mud is gone, the river water has become clear, and to 
enjoy this, scores of swans, saras (ff/W) , and cows have descended on the banks. The 
snakes who were forced inside holes during rains, are now coming out hungry. The night 
in sharad appears like a bride draped in white sari of moon light. Her brilliant face is 
made by moon, and stars form her twinkling eyes. The saras birds, after feeding upon 
the paddy corns, fly in the sky, as if garlands are sustained in air. The presence of 
swans and lotuses appear like jewels and apparels of the lakes.” 

Quoting various evidences of end of rainy period, Ram advised Lakshaman to go to 
Kishkindha and remind Sugriv of his commitments, “If he is lost in royal luxuries and lust 
I would send him to the death world where Vali was dispatched. Vali has gone there 
alone but this time I would send Sugriv with all his kith and kin. So far there is no 
evidence of his initiatives to locate Sita as committed by him earlier.” 

4-31 Lakshaman on way to Kishkindha ( 51 / 1355) 

Lakshaman was full with wrath, and he mentioned, “Sugirv had established friendship in 
presence of fire god, and if he fails to meet the commitment he had made, his state and 
wealth would soon be destroyed. He appears to have forgotten our objective to which he 
had given words. I would now kill him, and make Angald the king of Kishkindha who will 
carry out the searching mission of Sita.” 


Page 17 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Ram tried to assuage his anger, “It is not proper to immediately lose temper on Sugriv. 
With soft words he needs to be reminded that the period to find Sita has come to an end, 
and we haven’t heard any of your initiatives in this regard.” 

Lakshaman stormed towards Kishkindha and on his way he didn’t care about the trees 
or rock masses. When he arrived close to the cave city, the elephant like monkeys who 
were moving around stood with trees and stones in their hands. Lakshaman became 
very angry and his face became so terrifying that monkeys began running away. Some 
monkeys informed Sugriv about his anger who stood near the city, but Sugriv lost in 
liquor influence couldn’t heed to their words. 

The monkeys on guard of the city had come out equipped with trees and heavy rock 
masses. They saw Lakshaman in a state of extreme wrath who appeared to them as five 
hooded angry and mighty serpent (4-31-30) , and he was fiercely hissing hot air. In the 
meanwhile scared Angad moved close to him, whom Lakshaman asked, “My son, 
Angad, convey to Sugriv that Lakshaman brother of Ram has arrived and he wants to 
see you.” 

Going inside the palace Angad touched the feet of Sugriv, Tara and Ruma, and 
mentioned to Sugriv, “Valiant son of Sumirta, Lakshaman has arrived.” Sugriv was in 
deep slumber because of his lusty life and couldn’t hear Angad’s words. 

Trying to please Lakshaman, other monkeys created mildly respectful and joyful sound, 
but he remained unimpressed and continued in wrath. Two ministers, Plaskh and 
Prabhaw, submitted to Sugriv, “Ram and Lakshman have demonstrated their 
righteousness and truthfulness. With their assistance you have been restored to royal 
status. One of them, Lakshaman have arrived here, and his angry mood has caused 
panic among the monkeys. Kindly move to him respectfully with your kith and kin, and 
bowing head over his feet try to calm him down.” 

4-32 Hanuman counseled Sugriv (22 / 1377) 

Coming to learn about anger of Lakshaman, Sugriv stood up and spoke, “Neither I have 
committed any fault nor spoken any words against Lakshaman. I am not able to 
comprehend, as to what caused him so angry. I guess, some of my adversaries must 
have misguided him. I am not ever capable of paying back their obligation to me.” 

Hanuman present among ministers mentioned, “Ram has demonstrated his affection to 
you by sending his younger brother. You have slipped from your commitment to 
commence the finding out mission of Sita. The clarity of water in river, enhanced 
brightness of the day and night apparently suggest the advent of sharad (autumn). Lost 
in royal luxuries you didn’t care about your commitments. I have frankly submitted this 
for your benefits. I would advise you to go with your entire family to him, and offer your 
respects in his feet. He may calm down. Even if he uses a few harsh words, never mind 
about that.” 


Page 18 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-33 Tara calmed down Lakshaman (66 / 1443) 

Angad invited Lakshaman inside to Kishkindha. Moving ahead he saw the cave city of 
Kishkindha. It had well laid out plan, having provision of ponds, lakes and groves of fruit 
bearing trees. Monkeys had seen his anger, and therefore instead of surrounding him, 
they moved isolated and scattered. On the main street, Lakshaman saw the well 
decorated palace of Angad. On the same street was situated the residences of Maind, 
Dwid, Gavay, Gavaksh, Gaj, Sharabh, Vidyunmali, Sampati, Suryaksh, Hanuman, 
Virbahu, Subahu, Nal, Kumud, Sushen, Tar, Jambvan, Dadhimukh, Neel, Supatal and 
Sunetra. All the isolated mansions were white and decorated with flowers. The gates of 
these mansions had covering of gold and gems. 

Away was the fort of Sugriv, isolated by high ramparts. Being guarded heavily by mighty 
monkeys, it has impregnable and difficult access. The celestial trees, laden with fruits 
and flowers, gifted by Indr had enhanced the grandeur of the king Sugriv’s palace. 
Crossing seven exterior gates, Lakshaman entered the inner palace. He saw several 
attractive sets of seats and couches which had been decorated with gems and precious 
metals. Soon he heard the echo of melodious and soft songs accompanied on the tunes 
of violin. Beautiful and young women, seen inside, indicated the grandeur of the palace. 
The attendants were found active and well dressed. 

The sound of the anklets coming out from the movement of the palace women, could 
initially make Lakshaman, a little shy. Reminded by his main purpose of visit, finding no 
evidence of initiative on his mission, again he grew angry, and stretched the string of his 
bow making loud and terrifying sound. He stood alone at a distance. 

Scared by the sound of his bow, Sugriv got up, and anxiety gripped him severely. He 
requested Tara to go and find out the reason of his anger. Sure, we appear to have 
committed some mistake. 

Tara came out, and seeing her Lakshaman was a little calmed down. Tara respectfully 
mentioned, “Who would dare to displease you? Who would dare violate your command? 
What has caused such a great anger?” Hearing Tara’s wise full submission, Lakshaman 
spoke, “Sugriv spend four months without any initiative. He was fully lost in the palace 
lust and luxuries, ignoring our main purpose of friendship. There are two types of friends: 
first, who is interested in the prosperity of the friend, and the second, who is established 
in dharma and truth. I find the absence of both in Sugriv." 

Tara again submitted politely, “It is a fact that he was in the grip of lust and intoxication. 
The elders and wise ones, never disown the closer ones. You are much superior to him 
and you should pardon him for his fault. Subordinates should not be subjected to such 
anger. Although he was lost in the sensual comforts, he had issued command and as a 
result, scores of monkeys have gathered from several quarters. These monkeys are 
capable of changing forms, industrious and strong." 


Page 19 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Tara praised his sense of modesty and decorum that seeing women in the palace he 
didn’t move inside and stood outside. She ushered him inside the Sugriv’s royal 
chamber where Sugriv had occupied the throne bedecked with gold and gems. He was 
surrounded by beautiful women, and when first glance of Lakshaman fell on him, he was 
seen embracing his wife Ruma closely. 

4-34 Sugriv rose to Lakshaman (19 / 1462) 

Lakshaman entered the chamber of Sugriv, and seeing his arrival, Sugriv jumped out of 
his throne. Coming to Lakshaman he stood with folded hands and his wife Ruma and 
other women also followed him. 

Lakshaman expressed his outburst, “Sugriv, do you know the outcome of forgetting 
some one’s obligation? Your purpose has been served and very easily you forgot the 
commitment you made to such a friend who had been true to his words. You must be 
aware, Brahma once recited one sholk conveying that there is solution of seeking 
liberation against the sin committed by killing a cow, taking liquor, indulging in a theft, 
and breaking the penance, but there is no way out of emancipation of a person who 
ignores the obligation and turns ungrateful. You should not forget that your friend who 
used an arrow to send Vali to the other world is shorn of that arrow. Soon, following the 
same route you would also join Vali.” 

4-35 Tara pacified Lakshaman (23 / 1485) 

Tara came forward and pacifying Lakshaman spoke, “Sugriv is the king, and such harsh 
words are humiliating for the king. He is in fact, neither ungrateful, nor liar, nor cruel, nor 
cunning, nor idiot. For long time he was driven out of the royal luxuries, and when that 
got restored to him, he become a captive of the sensual and other physical pleasures. 
That has created an impression about his negligence of the sacred work of Ram. 
However, such indulgence is not unnatural. In this respect, the example of Vishwamitr is 
quite instructive. One, he was trapped in the sensual pleasure of Ghritachi (Menaka), 
one of the celestial dancers, and lost his tab on time. Ten years passed as if one day 
had passed. Person like Vishwamitr can be diverted for sensual enjoyment, what to talk 
of the lesser being, i.e., a monkey like Sugriv.” 

She continued, “For a person of your superiority, such treatment of the king is not 
appreciable. I am sure, for the work of Ram, he would never hesitate sacrificing me, 
Ruma and his kingdom of Kishkindha. He would definitely kill those devil demons and 
bring back Sita to Ram as if rohini (4-35-14) is brought closer to moon. I have learnt from 
the mouth of Vali, that one hundred crore 4 , thirty six ayut 5 , thirty six thousand, and thirty 

4 Crore wr? is ten million. 

5 Ayut is ten thousand. The Indian ancient counting system is : ek (one), dash (ten), shat (hundred), sahasr (thousand), 
ayut (ten thousand), laksh (lakh - hundred thousand), pryut (ten lakh, or million), koti (crore - one hundred lakh or ten 
million), arbud (ten crore, or one hundred million), abj (arab, one thousand million or one billion), kharv (ten arab, or ten 
billion), mahapadm (ten kharv, or hundred billion), shanku ( neel , or thousand billion or trillion), jaladhi (ten neel, or ten 
trillion). 


Page 20 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


six hundred demons live in Lanka. They can assume any form in disguise and are 
deceptive. Before killing Ravan, it appears a necessity to kill those demons. For such a 
colossal task, the help of Sugriv is essential. He has already sent for millions of monkeys 
from all quarters, and today is the last day assigned to them to gather. Their number is 
expected to be one thousand crore bears, one hundred crore baboons, and several 
crores other monkeys. Seeing you enraged, and apprehending some mishap, we 
women of the palace have lost our peace of mind. Please calm down." 

4-36 Apologetic Sugriv (20 / 1505) 

Tara’s initiative pleased Lakshaman and he discarded his anger. Sugriv felt fearless, and 
coming forward he spoke to him, “My kingdom, fame and royal magnificence had been 
redeemed by Ram. His one arrow not only pierced through seven trees but that tore 
apart several mountains, went deep into netherworld and returned back to him. His this 
potential is unparallel and he hardly needs any help from anybody. He is alone capable 
to kill all the demons and retrieve Sita. I would only be a small fry following his footsteps. 
Being his servant, whatever lapses have occurred due to me, I beg to be pardoned. 
There is no servant who never committed any mistake.” 

Lakshaman was pleased with this statement of Sugriv. Praising him for his humility and 
politeness he requested him, “You and Ram are great who exercise restrain over anger. 
Come with me to Ram. He keeps grieving remembering Sita. You need to console him.” 

4-37 Monkeys sent for again (37 / 1542) 

Before leaving with Lakshaman, Sugriv spoke to Hanuman, “Let us send fast and able 
monkeys to send for monkeys from five main mountain zones of mahendr, himvan, 
vindhya, Kailas, and mandrachal. Monkeys staying at places like, western coast, the 
sun’s bastion of udayachal and astachal, in the forest near padmachal, anjan 6 mountain, 
meru 7 mountain, dhumr 8 and maharun 9 mountain need to be called by sending special 
messengers. Monkeys in all the forests, and those taking shelter in the zone of fragrant 
hermitages of sages also have to be contacted and invited to be present immediately." 

He also asked to send reminder to those who had been invited earlier. Those who fail to 
turn up within ten days fatal punishment need to be imposed against them. 

As advised Hanuman sent such messengers who were capable of taking sky routes. 
Those messengers meeting the monkeys in various regions of earth inspired them to 
come immediately at Kishkindha for special mission of Ram. 

Monkeys began arriving at Kishkindha from all quarters in huge numbers, viz., (i) three 
crore of collyrium complexion from kajal giri, (ii) ten crore of golden complexion from 
astachal (setting sun mountain), (iii) one thousand crore of white complexion (as of 


Monkeys complexion in this mountain are black and they look like elephants. 

7 Their complexion is bright golden. 

8 Monkeys habitual of taking mariya madhu (a sweet drink). 

9 Their complexion is reddish like rising sun. 


Page 21 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


mane of lion) from Kailas, (iv) one thousand thousand crore from the Himalayas, (v) one 
thousand crore of red complexion (resembling planet mars) from vindhya, (vi) 
innumerable monkeys from coastal and tamal van area who stayed on the coconut 
water. Their arrival was so impressive that even sun was not visible due to their 
presence in sky around Kishakindha. 

Those messengers who were sent earlier (under the supervision 10 of Neel), while 
passing through the Himalayas, spotted a huge tree at the venue where Shiv once had 
performed ygya. Huge collection of ygya cereals and ghee were made on that occasion. 
Out of their oblation offered to fire, later grew trees of such varieties who bore delicious 
fruits. One who takes one fruit of those trees could stay for one month fully satisfied 
without any want of food. Those messengers collected huge quantities of those fruits 
and offered them in gift to Sugriv when they arrived at Kishkindha. 

4-38 Sugriv with Ram (34 / 1476) 

Glad Sugriv on receiving the delicious gifts, praised the efforts of the messengers. 
Lakshaman, advised him to move out of Kishikindha. Sugriv asked the palace women 
and other monkeys to go inside. He asked royal palanquin to be brought and when that 
was made ready, he requested Lakshaman to mount that. He also mounted the same 
palanquin and it was carried to the place where Ram stayed. The palanquin was 
surrounded by hundreds of monkeys, and they moved sounding conch, drum and other 
royal instruments. 

On arriving to Ram, Sugriv and Lakshaman came out of the palanquin and stood folded 
handed before Ram. Other monkeys also followed them. Ram saw Sugriv placing his 
head over his feet, and getting up he embraced him closely. Ram offered him a seat and 
spoke, “The king need to be alert to the balance of arth (wealth), dharm (righteousness), 
and kam. If only kam prevails, the royal inheritance is endangered. The king should 
discharge his duty promptly on time.” 

Sugriv politely submitted, “My inheritance is your blessings, for I was forced out of the 
royal possession. Thousand of monkey have arrived along with the messengers and 
several millions are arriving shortly. Those who are offspring of gandharv, and kinnar 
are capable of assuming any form according to their wishes, and they are well informed 
about the mountains, forests and oceans and all the territories on earth. They are about 
to arrive in multitude. The monkeys are mighty and skillful. Killing the demons, they 
would retrieve Sita at the earliest." 

Such a confident statement of Sugriv made Ram very happy, and his appearance of a 
blooming blue lotus encouraged and excited all those present with him. 


10 Refer sarg 4-29 


Page 22 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-39 Arrival of monkeys (44 / 1520) 

Ram praised Sugriv and mentioned, “Sita’s abduction is self damaging exercise of 
Ravan. He would be killed as Indr had killed his arrogant and deceptive father-in-law, 
Pulom (father of Sachi)." 

While Ram was talking to Sugriv, the surrounding became cloudy due to dust raised by 
the arrival of billions of monkeys. Some of them had complexion of the pinkish rising 
sun. Some were yellowish like pollen of louts, while others coming from himachal were 
white. Some of them had the appearance of a bright moon. Shatbali had arrived with ten 
arab (hundred billion), and father of Tara was accompanied by thousand crore (ten 
billion). Father of Hanuman, Keshari who had a complexion of yellow pollen of lotus, and 
face pink like rising sun, had arrived with several millions of monkeys. Baboons led by 
Gvaksh were ten arab (hundred billion) in number. Dhumra was seen with twenty arab 
(two hundred billion) bears. Panas army comprised of ten crore (thirty million) monkeys. 
Neel, having blue complexion of kajjal mountain, was surrounded by thirty million 
monkeys. Gavay of the golden complexion of Meru mount, had arrived with fifty million 
monkeys. Darimukh, a mighty monkey leader, arrived with hundred billion monkeys. 
Both the brothers, Dwid and Maind, were seen with hundred billion monkeys. Thirty 
million monkeys had accompanied Gaj. The king of bears, Jambvan stood near Sugriv 
and had bears’ contingent of one hundred million. Stormy arrival of Ruman had brought 
ten billion monkeys. Subsequently, arrived Gandhamadan, who was accompanied by 
one trillion monkeys. Angad, mighty like his father, arrived with one thousand one trillion 
monkeys. Taar, having the brightness of stars, was seen arriving with fifty million 
monkeys. Learned Indrjanu, was seen with fifty five million monkeys. Rambha, looking of 
red complexion had come with eleven thousand one hundred monkeys. Durmukh was 
seen with twenty million monkeys. Hanuman had the gathering of one hundred billion 
monkeys looking like white tops of Kailas. Nal contingent comprised of ten billion, one 
thousand one hundred monkeys who were residents of Dhrum. Dadhimukh had 
contingent of one hundred billion, roaring monkeys. Sharad, Kumud, Vahni and Ranh 
and other group leaders had gathered innumerable monkeys from different forests and 
mountains. 

The monkeys paid their due respect to Sugriv. Those who couldn’t reach him, greeted 
him from a distance with a soft and vocal sounds. Sugriv acquainted Ram about the 
arrival places of monkeys who had surrounded him like cloud encircling the sun. They 
stayed at various suitable places in the near vicinity. 

4-40 Monkeys dispatched to the east (71 / 1591) 

Sugriv sought the command of Ram for those monkeys. Ram, welcoming his initiative, 
mentioned, “First we have to find where does Ravan stay? We have to establish, 
whether Sita is alive. Once her whereabouts is discovered, we would plan future course 
of action. As regards the command to these monkeys, I fully rely your capability and 
strategy of action. You, therefore assign them the specific directions for their search. 


Page 23 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Sugriv asked Vinat, to take one hundred thousand monkeys and go in the east to find 
out the location of Ravan and Sita. He enlisted the places, rivers, and territories to be 
hunted for Sita: (i) Rivers of ganga, saryu, kaushaki, Yamuna, saraswati, sindhu, 
shonbhadr, kalmahi\ (ii) territories of brahmamal, videh, malav, kashi, kosal, magadh, 
pundrdesh, ang; (iii) yav dweep (java), suvarndweep (Sumatra). 

Sugriv asked to go all the places including those of kirat whose body’s lower portion is 
like humans and the upper part is of a lion. They are eaters of raw and fresh fish. 

He further mentioned, “Inhabiting demons and gods is shishir mountain range, which lies 
beyond Java. On the other side of sea, is the residence of sidh and charan. There flows 
river Shon, water red in colour, and in its surrounding are several dense forests and high 
mountains. Beyond the eastern territories lies the sea of sugarcane juice. This is infested 
with demons who drag the passersby and satisfy their hunger by killing them. Mighty 
serpents also stay there. Farther to that is lohit sea, beyond which is shalmali dweep 
having a large kutshalmali tree. Close to that tree is the residential palace of Garud , son 
of Vinita. That territory is inhabited by demons who every day in the morning attack over 
the rising sun. Soon they fall down due to the hot sun. Having fallen down in sea of 
liquor, they gain their life back. They keep on repeating their attack over sun every day in 
the morning. From there one can view ksheer sagar (sea of milk). There is mountain 
called Rishabh in the midst of ksheer sagar and there is a lake named sudarshan at the 
top of that mountain. The lake is full of silver white lotuses and to enjoy its fragrance 
scores of celestial dancers keep on visiting this lake. Beyond ksheer sagar is sea of 
palatable water which terrify the beings due to vadvamukh, always burning under the 
curse of the sage Aurav. About thirteen yojan beyond in the north of this sea is a golden 
mountain where divine serpent anant reside who has one thousand hoods. He is 
wrapped in blue cloths and has golden crowns. At the top of the mountain there flutters a 
three pronged flag carrying palm tree mark. At the bottom of the flag staff over the 
ground, there exists an oblation square. This mountain is udaigiri and has groves of 
trees of sal, tal and tamal. There is a peak called saumanas which is one yojan wide and 
ten yojan high. When vaman bhagwan stepped out to measure three steps of land, he 
put his first feet over saumanas and the second was placed on meru. When sun 
completes his orbit, he crosses the highest peak saumanas, and he becomes visible to 
all the inhabitants of Jambudweep. Over that peak are seen balkhilya sages, along with 
meditating vaikhanas. From one gets entry to earth coming from brahmlok. One who 
leaves earth for brahmlok also passes through this gateway. This gate way was the first 
creation of brahma, and therefore it is called purv disha (eastern direction, literally 
meaning, created earlier)." 

Sugriv exhorted the monkeys to go searching Sita on all all places upto udaigiri for there 
is no visible place on earth beyond that. Even sun and moon don’t light beyond that. 
The assignment of search should be completed in thirty days, failing which, mortal 
punishment would be implemented. 


Page 24 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-41 Most trusted Team to the south (49 / 1640) 

Angad was made the overall leader of the southern team and the important ones of the 
team were Neel (son of fire), Hanuman, Jambvan (son of Brahma), Suhotr, Sharai, 
Shargulm, Gaj, Gavaksh, Gavay, Vrishabh, Maind, Dwid, Sushen (group leader), 
Gandhmadan, Ulkhamukh, Anag. Before leaving Sugriv addressed them, “You are all 
familiar with the part of search assigned to you. I repeat the locations of rivers, 
territories, mountains and forests to be hunted by you. Among rivers Narmada, 
Godavari, Mahanadi, Krishnveni, Mahabhaga, Varada etc. have to fully searched. The 
territories of visit shall be Mekal, Utkal, Dasharn, Abravanti, Awantipuri, Vidarbh, Rishtik, 
Mahshik, Vang, Kaling, Kaushik, Andhra, Pundr, Choi, Pandya, and Keral. The mountain 
ranges of Vindhya is very important.” 

He further guided, “Visit Malay giri (mountain) and have darshan (visit respectfully) of the 
sage Agastya. Seeking his permission, cross Tamrparni running along sandal wood 
forests, and this river ends in sea leaving behind several charming lakes and water 
bodies. Moving across the pandya territory, you will reach sea shore. The sage Agastya 
has established one mountain deep in the sea which is called Mahendrgiri and is 
covered with groves of trees at its peaks. Gods, yaksh, sages and celestial dancers 
keep on visiting this mountain. Beyond the sea is an island spread over one hundred 
yojan, is fully protected beyond the reach of humans. This island of Lanka is our main 
destination because it is inhabited by Ravan and we are searching him to end his life. 
While crossing the sea, there is a danger of a demoness called Angaraka who kills the 
beings by catching their shadow and pulling them down to her deadly grip.” 

Sugriv described the places beyond Lanka, “Beyond Lanka, in sea is the mountain 
Pushipitak which is one hundred yojan wide. This mountain is visited by sidha and 
charan and has two peaks. The golden 11 one is visited daily by sun, and the silver peak 
is visited by moon (4-41-30). Those peaks are not visible to atheist, cruel and ungrateful 
ones. All of you should bow down your head in honour of that mountain. Another 
mountain Suryavan is fourteen yojan beyond the pushipitak and has difficult access. 
Farther to Suryavan is Vaidyut mountain full of delicious fruits and honey. Next is Kunjar 
mountain over which the sage Agastya has a beautiful residential palace which is one 
yojan wide and ten yojan long. On the same mountain there is city inhabited by serpents 
and is called bhogawati. The king of the serpents Vasuki stays here. Further ahead you 
will find Rishabha mountain where you will see varieties of sandal woods, viz., 
goshirshak, padamak, harishyam etc. You should never use those sandals because it is 
heavily protected by gandharv rohit. Five chiefs of gandharva, viz., Shailush, Gramani, 
Shiksh, Shuk and Babhru also stay there. 

Sugriv further indicated about the worlds of gods and pitru lok situated beyond Rishabha 
mountain where humans couldn’t find access. There only darkness has its domain and 
beyond the bounds of living terrestrial beings. He advised the team to make all attempt 


11 


Two peaks suggest that sun and moon have separate movement orbits. 


Page 25 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


before that world, and he would be pleased the news about Sita within thirty days. 
Whoever would break the auspicious news to me would receive my full brotherly and 
friendly favour. 

4-42 Team to the west (58 / 1698) 

Sugriva approached Sushen, father of Tara, and father-in-law, offering him salutation, 
designated him the leader of the group leading to the west. The team comprised of sons 
of several sages among them were Archishashman, and Marich (also called Archimalya) 
the sons of the sage Marichi. Two hundred thousand monkeys accompanied this team. 

Sugriv describing the places to be looked into mentioned, “Saurashtr, Bahlik, and 
Chadrchitr where groves of trees of punnag, bakul, uddalak and kevara existed in 
abundance. The western territory, in general, is dominated by desert having surrounding 
of tough mountainous terrain. Further to that is western sea with timi fish and terrible 
crocodiles. The coastal area is full of fragrant bushes of kevara , trees of tamal, and 
coconuts. The coastal cities of Murvaipattan, Jatapur, Avanti, and Anglepapuri should 
not be missed. At the confluence of the river sindhu and sea is the colossal mountain of 
Somagiri which has got one hundred peaks. Over those peaks one can see forest of 
large trees where gigantic birds, Sinh are found. Those birds pick timi fish from the 
sea, and elephants from the forests, and carry them to the somagiri peaks. The 
elephants carried by these birds enjoy the natural environment rich in trees and water of 
the peaks. The monkeys who are capable of assuming the body of any being, need to 
search the peaks for Sita.” 

He continued, “In the midst of the sea there is one mountain called Pariyatr which has 
golden peak spread over one hundred yojan. This place is inhabited by twenty four 
crore (240 million) gandharv whose body shine like fire. No one of you should pluck or 
damage fruits and trees, for they are closely guarded by those gandharv. Mighty among 
you should not worry about the strength of those gandharv. Near to Pariyatr is another 
mountain called vajr which has formations of very hard stone like diamond. This is 
spared over an area of hundred yojan wide and long. There are several caves over this 
mountain, and Sita must be searched in all of them.” 

Before dwelling upon astachala and meru, Sugriv mentioned, “In one quarter of the sea 
is the mountain known as chakrvan where the celestial craftsman ( viswakarma ) had 
created sahasrar chakr. Vishnu killed panchjanya and hayagriv demons here, and 
grabbed from them panchjanya conch and sudarshan disc (4-42-28). Beyond that is 
varah mountain spread over sixty four yojan. You will find a golden city, pragjyotish 
which is the place of a famous demon narak. Sita must be carefully searched here. 
Further to that is Meghagiri where thousands of springs are found. The area has 
innumerable lions, tigers, elephants and boars moving around the springs. Gods had 
crowned Indr as ruler here, and he was called pakshasan Indr who used green horses.” 

Sugriv described the frontier of the earth formed by meru and astachal, “Farther to Indr’s 
meghagiri are situated sixty thousand golden mountains and amidst them is the famous 


Page 26 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


meru parvat. Earlier sun had blessed this mountain that those who would stay here 
would be bright like gold. The trees over here are all of gold. Gods, demons, and 
gandharva residing here are shining golden. Viswadev, Vasu, Marudgan and other gods 
arrive on this sacred mountain everyday in the evening to offer their respectful worship 
to sun. Ten thousand yojan away from meru is astachal which is abode of varun. In 
coming from meru to this place, sun takes about half muhurt only (4-42-43). There is 
one magnificent and vey high golden palm tree located in the mid of meru and astachal. 
This tree has ten branches, and the oblation squares below this tree are of rare 
formation and importance. You must visit this place also. There is one renowned sage 
Merusavarni, who stay at meru and is capable of carrying out creation like prajapati. 
You must offer your respect over his feet and enquire about Sita from him. Beyond 
astachal the world is beyond the bound of the mortals and all of you should meticulously 
look into all the places upto here. You need to comeback on completion of one month 
and those found late would be given capital punishment." 

4-43 Team to the north (62 / 1760) 

Shatabali was appointed the team leader of one hundred thousand monkeys who were 
children of yamaraj. They were asked to visit the territories of mlech, pulind, shursen, 
prasthal, bharat, kuru, madr, kamboj, yavan, and that of the shak. The Himalayas were 
to be visited specially where the bushes of lodhr , and padamak are famous. The forest 
of devdaru trees had to be searched carefully. 

Sugriv mentioned, “The hermitage of somashram shall be hunted where gods and 
gandharv reside delightfully. Beyond that, the mountain of kal should not be missed. 
Here several golden mines exist and all the mines had to be verified. After this is 
sudarshan mountain, and beyond that is devasakh mountain where varieties of birds are 
found. Thereafter lonely desert exists which is spared over hundred yojan. White brilliant 
Kailas is on the northern edge of the desert. Kuber has his abode over Kailas and his 
mansion is made of jambunad gold. There is a large lake in its vicinity having varieties of 
lotuses visited by royal swans and other birds. After this are situated famous caves of 
kronchgiri. Accomplished sages stay here. Further to this is manas peak devoid of living 
beings, including spirits, demons and gods. This is also called kamsail known for 
penance place of cupid, god of lust. Thereafter is mainak mountain abode of may danav 
TT Trw who has built a magnificent fort for himself. Here you can find horse like mouth 
of female kinnar. Crossing this zone will lead you the area where hermitages of 
accomplished sages are found who are worshipped by gods. The sages are sidha, 
vaikhanas, and valkhilya who are sinless and pure. There is one lake called vaikhanas 
sar having golden lotus and golden swans. Sarvbhaum elephants used in the carriage of 
kuber roam around this lake. Beyond this lake is a large and lonely zone where no 
stars, sun or moon is visible but it is always lighted with the brilliance of sages staying in 
this part. Further to this is shailoda river, where groves of keechak bamboo are found. 
This bamboo itself produces the sound of a flute, and sages use this bamboo to cross 
the river shailoda. On the other bank of shailoda is uttar kuru where sacred souls reside. 
This area has thousands of rivers gifted with green leave lotuses. The lakes in this area 


Page 27 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


has red water and red lotuses. The banks and beds of the rivers and the lakes are made 
of precious gems. The trees bear varieties of fruits, and where different kind of birds 
have made their nests. The trees yield comfortable beds and other luxurious materials. 
These trees also bear women of exquisite beauty. Candharv, kinnar, nag, vidyadhar 
stay here with these women as their consorts. Everybody is happy here. 

Sugriv described about north sea and land out of bounds of living beings, “Moving 
further one can find north sea, and in its centre is seen the somgiri mountain abode of 
Vishnu , rudra and brahma. Sun doesn’t have access to this mountain, and is 
resplendent with its own golden brilliance. You can’t go beyond that and after the 
glimpse of somgiri you should return back.” 

Concluding, Sugriv wished them good luck, and assured them warm greetings on their 
return and prize of fabulous and precious gifts. 

4-44 Hanuman carried Ram’s ring (17 / 1777) 

Sugriv had a conviction that Hanuman would be able to achieve the objective. Having 
this in mind he confided with Hanuman, “Your movement is free like your father vayu, in 
all the worlds of gods, demons, gandharv, and others. I am sure you would find out Sita 
soon. Your strength, knowledge of scriptures, command of expression and loyalty 
suggest that the goal is achievable by you." 

Ram watched Sugriv confiding on Hanuman. He also had a natural inclination towards 
Hanuman. He took out his ring carved with his name and offering that to Hanuman 
spoke, “Sugriv has full confidence of your loyalty, knowledge, strength and sincerity. 
Take this ring and this will enable you to win the confidence of Sita. She would be able 
to freely express her feelings and impressions to you." 

Hanuman gladly possessed that ring and putting that over his head as a mark of great 
respect to that ring, he offered his sincere salutation to the feet of Ram. When he was 
about to move Ram again spoke, “O, excellent one, make all efforts to find her out.” 

4-45 Monkeys expressed their confidence (17 / 1794) 

Sugriv addressing monkeys asked them to find out Sita at the earliest. Shatabali moved 
to the north towards the Himalayas. Vinat marched towards east. Hanuman, Tar and 
Angad moved in the south, the direction of the sage Agastya. Sushen moved to the 
west, towards the abode of varun. 

While they were moving out jubilantly producing sound of happiness, they passed close 
to Sugriv and each one of them expressed confidence, “I am alone able to cross 
hundred yojan and would bring Sita alive here after killing Ravan. No place, either deep 
sea, nether world or high sky is beyond my reach.” 

Monkeys moved out on their mission, and Ram and Lakshaman stayed at prasravangiri 
awaiting the end of thirty days assigned to them. 


Page 28 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-46 Sugriv narrated his wandering (24 / 1818) 

Ram wondered as to how Sugriv was familiar with the minute details of the geography of 
the globe. On his enquiry, Sugriv revealed, “When Vali had come back after killing the 
demon, and I was on the throne assuming he was killed by that demon, he became 
angry upon me. His anger turned into enmity and he wanted to kill me. With this 
objective he chased me. Running out I went to the east upto udyachal wandering 
through all the rivers, forests and mountains. When I saw him following me there, I 
turned to the south and went to the end. Vali didn’t spare me in this direction also, and 
scared of life, I ran in the west direction. He continued his chase, compelling me to run to 
the north. When I found him chasing me there also, on the advice of Hanuman, I took 
shelter here. Under fear of curse of death, Vali couldn’t enter this area. This is how, 
wandering, scared of life, and being chased by Vali, I came across all the places over 
earth.” 

4-47 Monkeys couldn’t find Sita (14 / 1832) 

Monkeys began coming back after end of one month. First came back Vinat, from the 
east and mentioned about the unavailability of Sita in that direction. Next return was of 
Shatabali from the north, and he too was without any clue about Sita. Sushen from the 
west arrived back having no hint about her. They all offered their respect to Ram at 
prasravan and pinned their hope on Hanuman who had gone to the south, in the 
direction Sita was learnt to have been abducted. 

4-48 Southern monkeys on quest (24 / 1856) 

The team lead by Angad and accompanied by Hanuman commenced their quest from 
vindhya mountains. They passed through all the places of settlements, forests, 
mountains, rivers and lakes. Continuing thus they came across a tough terrain without 
any life and trace of water. The rivers and ponds were lying dry. Trees had neither flower 
nor fruits. The sage Kandu had conducted penance in that zone and he lost his ten year 
son there. Getting angry, he cursed the terrain to be devoid of all the natural resources. 

Moving to the adjoining zone which was also tough, they met a gigantic demon. The 
demon scared them saying their life had run out. Angad took that giant as Ravan, and he 
hurled such a strong slap over his cheek that he fell bleeding though his mouth and died 
immediately. Encoraged the monkeys intensified their search but couldn’ find the clue 
about Sita. Disappointed they took shelter under a tree. 

4-49 Encouragement by Angad and Gandhamadan (22 / 1878) 

Angad was concerned about the passing of days without any outcome. He addressed 
the fellow monkeys, “We are all aware about the unfailing punishment of strict Sugriv. 
Our assigned period is fast running out. We need to muster our courage, and with 
sincerity resume the mission again. Sincere efforts are known to yield sweet results.” 
Gandhamadan, although tired and thirsty, but encouraged the team by promptly 
supporting the statement of Angad. 


Page 29 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-50 Monkeys in a mysterious cave (41 / 1919) 

They searched intensively all the areas of the vindhya range and from there moved 
towards south-west. The assigned period of the mission was over. Passing through deep 
forest and tough mountains they felt thirsty. In the meanwhile they could see the entry of 
a cave covered with green creepers and bushes. They also saw birds coming out of the 
cave whose body had were wet with water. Getting the indication of water inside the 
cave, they moved inside. The cave was known as rikshbil and was guarded by a demon. 
The entry was narrow, long and dark. The monkeys were groping in the dark joining their 
hands together. After a long trekking they could see open brightness. They found 
varieties of fruit and flower bearing trees, ponds of water, and mansions made of gold 
and silver around there. The mansions were rich in all living provisions. The fruits and 
flowers were golden, and the ponds had the fish and floating lotus all of gold. Moving 
ahead they came to a place where a woman in an ascetic’s garb was immersed in 
meditation. Getting closer, Hanuman enquired about her identity and about the cave city. 

4-51 Monkeys treated with food (19 / 1938) 

Hanuman expressed further, “O, goddess ! We are surprised with the affluence of the 
place. We wonder whether these are all real or magic of demons.” The woman ascetic 
replied, “You must have heard about the demon maya (*PT ). Pleasing bramha he got the 
boon of skill of architect ( viswakarma ) for creating marvelous structures. He was 
endowed with all the skills of structural formation of Sukracharya. Creating this place, he 
stayed here for pretty long time with comfort. Later, he came in contact with the celestial 
dancer, Hema. Indr became angry for his relation with Hema. He killed the demon in a 
combat, and thereafter, Brahma gifted this place to Hema. Being a dear friend of Hema, 

I was deputed by her protect this place. I am daughter of merusavarni, and my name is 
Swyamprabha. I wonder how did you locate this place. She enquired, “Who are you, and 
why are you moving in this deep forest? Here is delicious fruits and water; take them and 
feel comfortable.” 

4-52 Monkeys out from the cave (32 / 1970) 

When monkeys had finished their food and appeared fresh with their renewed energy, 
Swayamprabha enquired, “If you could do it, tell me about yourself.” Hanuman narrated 
frankly the entire story, “Ram son of Dasarath had been to forest with his wife Sita and 
brother Lakshaman. The demon, Ravan abducted Sita from Janasthan. Ram forged 
friendship with Sugriv, the king of monkeys. We have been deputed by Sugriv in quest of 
Sita. Searching the tough and deep forests and mountains of vindhya we were tired, 
thirsty and hungry. Finding indications of water in this cave, we entered here. With your 
grace we were served the food and water and now we are fresh to continue on our 
mission although the assigned period had elapsed. We have to hunt the sea and forward 
as Sita couldn’t be located in Vindhya and its surroundings. We doubt we would be able 
to get out of this cave. You help us in getting out from here and guide us against the 
wrath of Sugriv, as our life is limited now.” 


Page 30 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Swyamprabha responded positively to their appeal, “I have nothing to do with the worldly 
trifflings and I enjoy this life of penace and meditation. Although no body gets out alive 
from this cave, I would help you. All of you have to close your eyes.” 

As advised, monkeys closed their eyes with their hands and fingers. Soon they were out 
of the cave. Swyamprabha coming out spoke to them, “ Vindhya is here, and prasravan 
is on the other side. Sea is on your front. You go ahead with your mission.” Saying thus, 
she got into the cave. 

4-53 Angad proposed suicidal fast (27 / 1997) 

When they saw the towering waves of the sea, they became more afraid of their failure. 
Angad spoke to them, “I am afraid of my life now. Failed in mission, and assigned period 
is gone, if I go back to Sugriv, he would kill me. I was crowned with the initiative of Ram. 
Sugriv had hardly any softness for me. My death is imminent. Instead of getting killed by 
Sugriv, I would rather prefer to end my life here by keeping fast unto death.” 

Other monkeys were equally afraid of their failed mission. Breaking the uneasy 
quietness, Tar, spoke to them, “I would prefer to enter the cave of Swyamprabha and 
spend the life there instead of getting killed by Sugriv. Once inside, I would be free from 
all the fear. There is no dearth of food inside, and therefore this is option is better.” Other 
monkeys, including Angad were impressed by his proposal and they appeared to be in 
favour of his idea.” 

4-54 Hanuman persuaded the monkeys (22 / 2019) 

Sensing Angad favouring the proposal of Tar, Hanuman became skeptical about the 
sovereignty of Sugriv. He apprehended, “Angad is skillful in expression, endowed with 
physical might and potential, and getting the support of these monkeys may grab the 
kingdom of Kishkindha from Sugriv.” This anxiety gripped Hanuman. He was also expert 
in art of wining the people. He applied his tricks and caused split in the unanimity of the 
monkeys. Consequently he spoke to Angad, “These monkeys are more concerned about 
their wives and children. They would hardly accompany you in the cave. Your idea of 
eloping inside the cave is bound to flop. Indr has done partial damage to the cave and it 
would never be spared by Lakshaman. He is quite capable to open up this cave with his 
arrows, and bring out the hidden ones outside. You need to review your impression 
about Sugriv. Including me, Jambvan, Neel, and Suhotr we are avowed supporters of 
Sugriv. Your apprehension about Sugriv appears to be unfounded. Once we go and 
submit our failure to him, I don’t think he wouldn’t pardon us. He is, for sure, more 
sympathetic to your mother and you. Besides you, he doesn’t have any child.” 

4-55 Angad accompanied on fast (23 / 2042) 

Angad was not convinced about the softness of Sugriv and spoke to Hanuman, “I don’t 
take him a righteous and kind king. He is cruel and cunning. My father was alive and he 
grabbed my mother. He closed the door of the cave to eliminate my father forever. His 
ungratefulness to Ram was revealed when he was lost in the lust of women. The fear of 


Page 31 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


Lakshaman’s arrows compelled him to take initiatives. He may either put me in jail or try 
to get me eliminated rather protect me. I have no faith on him.” 

Saying this he resolved to fast unto death. He chose a spot on the sea shore, spread a 
kush mat and sipping sea water to confirm his resolve, sat eastward on fast. His eyes 
had tears. Other monkeys were grieved to see this state of Angad. They also followed 
his suite and gathered around him keeping fast to die. They discussed and related the 
incidents: Ram in forest, killing of mighty demons (Khar, Dushan, Trishira), abduction of 
Sita, killing of Jatayu, friendship of Sugriv, end of Vali etc. 

4-56 Scared monkeys and Sampati (24 / 2066) 

In the meanwhile Sampati came out of the cave and had a view of the scores of 
monkeys on fast. He was glad to see that he would get enough food from the gradual 
death of those monkeys. He spoke out his mind loudly and praised his fate. 

Hearing him thus speaking, monkeys fell in greater panic. To encourage them, Angad 
mentioned, “We appreciate our luck that for the cause of Ram we would also sacrifice 
our life as Jatayu had offered his life fighting the demon to save Sita.” When Samapati 
heard about Jatayu’s death he became grieved and wanted to know the exact cause of 
the incident. He spoke to monkeys, “I am elder brother of Jatayu. My brother stayed in 
Janasthan. Who was that demon who caused his death ? My wings are burnt from sun, I 
can’t fly. Take me down this hill, and tell me the details about the happenings." 

4-57 Angad helped Sampati (19 / 2085) 

Speaking to monkeys, Sampati immersed in grief and lost the continuity of his voice. 
Monkeys were scared with his voice and took him as their killer. It occurred them, “He 
might devour all of us. But since we are on fast until death, why to scare then ? Sooner 
the better.” 

Considering thus, the eventual imminent death, Angad helped in getting him down to the 
level of the monkeys. He narrated the story, “Riksharaja was my grandfather. He had 
two sons:Vali my father, and Sugriv. In the forest of Dandakaranya , to honour the words 
of his father, king of Dasarath, Ram came to stay with his wife Sita and brother 
Lakshaman. Ravan abducted his wife Sita from Janasthan. Jatayu was friend of 
Dasarath, and when he saw Ravan taking away Sita from sky route, he fought valiantly. 
He broke the chariot of Ravan, and put Sita back on ground. Ultimately Ravan killed him 
and took away Sita. Ram performed the last rites of Jatayu. Sugriv my uncle befriended 
Ram. Sugriv was banished by my father, so he avenged by getting my father Vali killed 
by Ram and has become the king of monkeys. Under his command we have come out 
searching Sita. We were lost in the cave near here and our assigned period of finding 
out Sita is now over. We apprehend death at the hands of Sugriv for our failure to locate 
Sita. Ram, Lakshaman and Sugriv will be angry and would cause the end of our life. 
Therefore, under fear we resolved to fast until death.” 


Page 32 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-58 Sampati revealed Sita’s place (37 / 2122) 

When Sampati heard about Jatayu’s end he was shocked and with tearful eyes he 
mentioned, “I have become old and wingless otherwise I would have avenged today the 
killing of my brother Jatayu. Earlier when both of us were young, I tell you an incident. 
Indr had killed Vritrasur; both of us, Jatayu and me attacked and won Indr. While coming 
back after registering victory over Indr, we went towards anshumali sun. My younger 
brother Jatayu felt the heat of sun, and in order to protect him I spread my wings over 
him. Consequently my wings were burnt and fell down on vindhya mountains. Since 
then, I haven’t heard about my brother.” 

Angad enquired from Sampathi, “You are brother of Jatayu and if you know about 
Ravan’s place, kindly enlighten us howto reach him.” 

Sampathi spoke, “I am wingless and helpless still I would assist in the sacred work of 
Ram. I know about Varun, the places where Vaman bhagwan placed thrice his foot. I 
have seen the battle of demons and gods, and the churning of sea for ambrosia. These 
are my known incidents. Due to my disability I am helpless. I saw once the devil Ravan, 
pacing through sky with a woman in his lap. She was crying hey Ram ! hey Lakshaman ! 
and due to her golden apparel she looked like a flashing light in the lap of the black 
demon. She was also throwing down her jewels. Because of her cry, I understand today, 
that the other day it was Sita being abducted by Ravan. I tell you now about Ravan. He 
is son of Vishrawa and brother of Kuber. He stays in Lanka, situated one hundred yojan 
from here in sea. Lanka was built by Viswakarma, and has golden gates and buildings. 
Within ramparts of Lanka, Sita is imprisoned and being guarded by strong contingent of 
demoness. From my concentration of mind, I visualize that you will comeback after 
meeting her.” 

Sampati further mentioned, “You have to make efforts to cross sea and reach Lanka. 
The first level nearest to earth is the flight route of sparrows and pigeons who live on 
cereals. Higher to this, on second level lies the route of flight of crows and other fruits 
eating birds. Higher to this is the third level suitable for eagles, kronch and kurar birds. 
Still higher is the fourth level used by hawk, and next higher of fifth level is for vultures. 
Next higher of sixth level is of swans, and still higher to this is the route of garud. I am a 
vulture and have genesis from garud. Due to some sinful act we vultures have become 
meat eaters. I would help you and avenge the misdeed of Ravan. I am able to see one 
hundred yojan away from here and I see Sita and Ravan in Lanka. I wish all success 
and I am convinced you will return successfully to Kishkindha after meeting Sita in 
Lanka. “ 

He then requested monkeys to take him to sea shore for he wanted to offer water tribute 
to his brother. Soon they carried him to sea and when he completed his tribute, he was 
taken back to his place. 


Page 33 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


4-59 Sampathi narrated more about Sita and Ravan (28/ 2150) 

Hearing Sampathi, Jambvan stood and asked him to tell more about Ravan and how to 
retrieve Sita. 

Sampathi narrated one incident, “When I lied down wingless in forest, my son 
Suparshav fetches food for me every day. You know gandharv are known for lust, 
serpents are known for anger, deer are known for fear, and vultures are known for 
hunger (4-59-9). One day my son came late in the evening without any food. I was angry 
on him.” 

My son submitted very mildly to me, “I was waiting for a prey with my beak down over 
sea shore. A black man holding a woman was crossing through the sky route. I wanted 
to offer that man and woman as your food, but when I stood on way, the man very softly 
requested me to leave him. Impressed by his soft submission I allowed him to fly. 
Immediately after that sidha approached and applauded my act of not killing that man 
and woman. They told that black man was demon king Ravan. The woman was in great 
grief, and her hair had spread out, while her jewels were falling down. She was crying 
hey Ram ! hey Lakshaman ! I spent my time in watching that. That is the reason I came 
empty handed.” 

Sampathi continued, “Since I had no wings, I couldn’t do anything. It is time now for you 
to act and you are capable to do that. Ram is blessed with deadly arrows gifted by 
Brahma. He would win over Ravan. You are also mighty and should not delay any more. 
Plan the initiatives to see Sita immediately.” 

4-60 Autobiography of Sampathi (1) (21 / 2171) 

Sampathi revived the courage in the hearts of monkeys. When he came back from sea 
shore, he was surrounded by them. He recalled his past, “Having burnt my wings I fell 
over one of the peaks of vindhya, and remained unconscious for six days. When some 
consciousness arose, I was not able to locate the place. Later I could understand it to be 
vindhya. With great difficulty I crawled from mountain top to the ground. In the past there 
used to be a great sage Nishakar, in this locality. He was an accomplished sage and 
was worshipped by gods and other beings. He is now no more and I stayed here for 
eight thousand years after his departure. I with Jatayu had met him earlier. I tried to see 
the sage again and with much difficulty arrived at his ashram. Sage was not present, so I 
was waiting for his arrival. I saw him coming surrounded by lions, serpents, deer and 
elephants. When he entered his ashram those wild animals dispersed. After a couple of 
hours the sage came out and coming to me tried to locate me. He recalled that both I 
and Jatayu used to touch his feet in the form of a human being. He identified me as one 
of the two, and asked as to what caused the loss of my wings.” 

4-61 Autobiography of Sampathi. ..(2). ...continued (17 / 2188) 

As desired by the sage to know the details of the incident, I narrated, “Having proud of 
our prowess, one day we two brothers raced against sun to meet him before he reached 


Page 34 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


astachal. We continued soaring high passing through several worlds. We reached the 
height from where the forest of the earth looked like grass, hills appeared like stone, and 
rivers appeared as if threads were tying the stones. Meru, the Himalayas, and vindhya 
appeared like elephants. We were on the route of the sun as looked if we were wheels of 
his chariot. The heat was so intense that I lost the sense of direction and location, and 
capability of vision. Concentrating mind with great difficulty I could see sun. Jatayu had, 
by this time decided to return downwards. I saw him getting down. I also followed 
covering him by my wings. Due to carelessness my wings were burnt, and I guessed 
Jatayu fell over Janasthan while I fell over vindhya." 

Further, I submitted to the sage, “I have lost my influence over the domain of the birds. 
Having separated from the brother, wingless and afflicted with deep wounds I am waiting 
to die.” 

4-62 Autobiography of Sampathi... (3). ...continued (15 / 2203) 

The sage kept quiet in mediation for a couple of hours and spoke to me, “You need not 
worry, I can revive your wings now, but I want to use you for greater purpose. A time will 
come when both of your small and big wings will sprout automatically.” 

The sage continued, “In the family of Ikshavaku there shall be a king Dasarath. His most 
able son, Ram would come in the forest with his wife and brother. His wife Sita will be 
stolen by the demon king Ravan. The demon will try to influence her but she will always 
be immersed in the memory of her husband, Ram. Her denial of taking anything, would 
concern Indr, and he would provide her divine ambrosia, kheer with milk porridge. First 
offer she will make by place the part of the kheer on earth for her husband and his 
brother.” 

The sage reminded me, “The monkey messengers will come here trying to locate Sita. 
You stay here awaiting the arrival of those monkeys and you will tell them about Sita and 
her position in Lanka. This will reap great benefit to you for you will be serving the entire 
creation for their welfare.” 

The sage had expressed his wish to have darshan of both the divine brothers but due to 
constraint of age he had to depart earlier. 

4-63 Autobiography of Sampathi. ..(4). ...continued (15 / 2218) 

Sampathi continued his story, “The sage Nishakar consoled me in several ways before 
he entered his ashram. I also left the place and came to stay over the vindhya. Since 
then I am awaiting your arrival. Getting impatient of long waiting period of eight thousand 
years, I several times attempted to commit suicide but the words of the sage kept me 
alive. When my son let Ravan go scot free I was not happy with him. I knew the strength 
of Ravan and my son could have easily dealt him, but he missed the opportunity.” 

Sampathi was narrating the story thus to the monkeys that his red new wings sprouted. 
He became recharged with new vigour. Expressing his happiness to the monkeys, he 


Page 35 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


assured them about good and auspicious future. Excited to test his wings, Sampathi 
took the flight up in the sky. 

The monkeys also were encouraged to take up renewed initiatives to see Sita in Lanka. 

4-64 How to cross the sea (22 / 2240) 

The monkeys arrived on the sea shore and were jubilant to take up the gigantic 
assignment of crossing the sea. When they looked over the sea and its vastness, they 
again got disappointed, “At some places the sea was quiet, at another it had small but 
rising tides, and still at other places towering tides were in view." The monkeys were at a 
loss and Angad tried to find out some way out. He asked them, “Who would take the 
credit of keeping us alive from the death penalty of Sugriv ? Who is going to win the 
laurel of performing the sacred work of Ram ?” Despite his several exhortations, none of 
the monkeys came forward. 

Angad then enquired, “Let us assess one by one, who can go upto what extent ?” 

4-65 Hanuman approached (35 / 2275) 

Each one of them spoke about their capability, and according to them their individual 
extent to cover was expressed in measure of yojarr. Gaj for ten, Gavaksh for twenty, 
Sharabh for thirty, Rishabh for forty, Gandhmadan for fifty, Maind for sixty, Dwid for 
seventy, Sushen for eighty. 

Jambvan spoke to them, “I have grown old now, but still I feel I can cross upto ninety 
yojan. There was a time when I was young, and I saw vaman bhagawan measuring the 
universe. At that time, in short time, I made complete round very swiftly.” 

Angad then spoke, “I can cross one hundred yojan wide sea, but I am not sure about my 
return journey.” 

Jambvan intervened, “I am aware of your capability, that you can cross hundreds of 
thousands of yojan, but how can we afford our leader to do that. You have to find 
someone from us for this job by setting aside yourself.” 

Angad was disappointed, “We don’t see any way out, and our last resort is again the fast 
until we die.” 

Jambvan assured him, “I would find a valiant who can do this task.” 

He went to Hanuman, who was sitting alone, away from the teaming monkeys. 

4-66 Jambvan encouraged Hanuman (38 / 2313) 

Jambvan addressed Hanuman, “Why are you sitting alone? We need your help. Your 
potential is like garud ^ (son of Vinata fomr, in the lineage of Kashyap &?w). Your arms 


Page 36 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


are as capable as garud’s wings. We commonly see garud deep in sea catching snakes. 
Your skill, talent, and potential are in no way inferior to garud." 

He further narrated in brief how he was born, “There was a famous celestial dancer, 
Punjiksthala ) . Due to curse, she was born as a daughter to the monkey 

Kunjar. Her name was Anjana (arsTT ) and she was capable of moving in the guise of 
humans. Once she was on a hill top enjoying alone the natural environment. The vayu 
god was impressed by her beauty and he embraced her. Initially Anjana objected but 
later, vayu god convinced her that he would bless her with a son equally strong and 
capable as him who would be able to move around freely in the universe as I do, 
besides being learned and knowledgeable. Subsequently she gave birth to you in a 
cave. Once while you were infant, assuming the rising sun as a fruit, made a rapid stride 
towards him. In a trice you were up three hundred yojan, and when you arrived at 
udayachal, Indr charged his bolt on you. This caused injury to your left chin ^5 . Vayu 
god, your father got angry, and he stopped his movement. The absence of air caused 
chaos in the universe. Gods began pursuing him to yield. In the process of persuasion 
Brahma blessed you not to be killed by any of the weapons. Indr blessed you to be 
master of your death, i.e., die on your will. This incident caused you to be called 
Hanuman sjcih.” 

Jambvan tried to impress upon him citing his own incidents, “Now I am old and not able 
to match the necessity of the situation. There was a time, when I gave rapid and quick 
twenty one rounds of the universe as an act of respect to vaman bhagwan who was then 
in His cosmic strides. During the ocean churning, I quickly collected necessary herbs 
from all over to facilitate the process of churning. I urge upon you to use your potential 
for our welfare. Your movement is matchless and you can easily cross the sea. Help out 
the disappointed monkeys, and come out with your forward steps as vaman bhagwan 
had done earlier.” 

67 Hanuman in readiness (49 / 2362) 

Inspired and encouraged by Jambvan, Hanuman readily showed his desire to cross the 
sea. Before taking up the stride, he expanded his body demonstrating his potential to 
undertake the assignment. Time and again he moved around his tail and gradually 
enlarged his body. The monkeys surrounded him and began producing joyful sound to 
honour his initiative. They were looking to him as if world were looking to vaman 
bhagwan. 

Reminded of his own potential, filled him with rare spirit. He stood among the monkeys 
and paid his respect to them. He addressed them with full confidence, “The assignment 
of crossing sea could be done by vayu, garud and me. I can go round mighty meru 
thousand times. My momentum can stir the sea causing flood over the entire earth. For 
sure, I can uproot the entire Lanka and carry it on my palm. I have the spirit and speed 
of vayu, and I can give thousand rounds to garud quickly. You can imagine my speed: I 
can follow sun when he moves from udyachal, go to astachal before he reaches there, 


Page 37 of 38 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Kishkindha kand 


come back to earth and again go and touch him before his arrival to astachal. See my 
body identical to meru now and I would fly across the sea accompanied by several trees 
and flowers dragged by my impulse and momentum. Today you will see my real 
performance. My form while crossing the sea would be like the cosmic body of vaman 
bhagwan. My wit is consistently supported by my will to act and the real performance. I 
am confident of visiting Sita today.” 

Jambvan greatly appreciated his initiative and expressed his utmost happiness. Before 
you leave, we intend to recite swasti mantra for abiding auspiciousness. We would be 
passionately awaiting your arrival here after visiting Sita. By that time we all would stand 
on one foot only. 

Hanuman revealed, “When I would take the leap, only mahendr mountain would be able 
to sustain the back pressure under my foot." 

Mentioning this he moved quickly to the mahendr top. His movement caused breaking of 
several peaks, and the entire mountain rocked like swinging cradle. The tigers, lions 
and elephants produced deafening roars. Gandharv and other celestial bodies were 
scared, and began leaving the mountain. The serpents stick out half body from the holes 
as if numerous flags fluttered over the mountain peaks. 

Looking towards his destination Lanka, Hanuman concentrated his mind fully on the 
commencement of the gigantic stride. 


Page 38 of 38 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Sundar kand 


Srimate Ramanuiav namah 

Preface 

Sundar kand is the fifth of the submissions in the successive series of condensed Valmiki 
Ramayan. In fact this kand deserves to be called Hanuman kand. Hanuman (variously known as 
Anjaneya, Mahaveer, Vajarangvali) has performed all divine deeds right from crossing of sea to 
burning of Lanka. The entire content of this kand hinges about Hanuman only. 

The incident of Jayant, son of Indr, disguised as crow pecking at Sita had taken place much 
earlier while she was in chitrakoot, but it has been divulged in Sundar kand ( sarg 38) instead of 
Aranya kand. 

It is the special feature of Valmiki Ramayan that while depicting any incident it is supplemented 
through different sarg, viz., Indrajeet was directed by Ravan to fight alone ( sarg 48) with 
Hanuman, but in sarg 58 Hanuman is found to eliminate his accompanying demons also. The 
reading of Valmiki therefore requires lot of attentive correlation. 

There are 68 sarg in this kand and together they consist of total 2858 Sanskrit shlok. The shlok in 
earlier four submissions had been 11,405 and putting this fifth one of Sundar kand together, the 
sum total becomes 14,263 in the initial five kand of Valmiki Ramayan. 


Srimann Narayan Charnau Sharnam Prapaddye. 


Submission: 

Srikrishna Prapnnachari 

Falgun krishan Tryodashi 
Mahashivratri 


February 12, 2010 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Sundar kand 


Contents 

page 

5-1 Flight across the sea (213 / 213) 1 

5-2 Entering strategy (58/271) 3 

5-3 Lankini surrendered (51 / 322) 4 

5-4 Wandering Hanuman (30 / 352) 5 

5-5 Hanuman disappointed (27 / 379) 5 

5-6 Wandering resumed (44 / 423) 6 

5-7 Ravan’s palace and pushpak viman (17 / 440) 6 

5-8 Pushpak revisited (8 / 448) 7 

5-9 Wandering inside the palace ( 73 / 521) 7 

5-10 Sleeping Mandodari (54 / 575) 8 

5-11 Thoughtful Hanuman (48 / 623) 8 

5-12 Puzzled Hanuman (25 / 648) 8 

5-13 Hanuman in dual mind (69 / 717) 9 

5-14 Hanuman in ashok vatika (52 / 769) 9 

5-15 Sita spotted (54 / 823) 10 

5-16 Her afflictions grieved Hanuman (32 / 858) 10 

5-17 Cheerful Hanuman (32 / 890) 11 

5-18 Ravan at ashok vatika (32 / 922) 11 

5-19 Sorrowful Sita (22 / 944) 12 

5-20 Ravan’s pursuance (36 / 980) 12 

5-21 Sita warned Ravan (34 / 1014) 12 

5-22 Ravan’s ultimatum (46 / 1060) 13 

5-23 Demonesses’ efforts (19 / 1079) 13 

5-24 Demonesses’ threats (47 / 1126) 14 

5-25 Wailing Sita (20 / 1146) 15 

ii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Sundar kand 


5-26 Sita sought to end life (49 / 1195) 15 

5-27 Trijata’s dream (54 / 1249) 15 

5-28 Sita intent to self immolate (19 / 1268) 16 

5-29 Auspicious omens of Sita (8 / 1276) 17 

5-30 Contemplative Hanuman (44 / 1320) 17 

5-31 Hanuman’s initiative (19 / 1339) 17 

5-32 Contemplative Sita (14 / 1353) 18 

5-33 Hanuman initiated dialogue (31 / 1384) 18 

5-34 Skeptical Sita (40 / 1424) 19 

5-35 Winning Sita’s confidence (90 / 1514) 20 

5-36 Souvenir to Sita (47 / 1561) 21 

5-37 Sita’s refusal (68 / 1629) 22 

5-38 Sita’s souvenir to Ram (70 / 1699) 24 

5-39 Sita’s anxiety (54 / 1753) 25 

5-40 Hanuman moved northward (25 / 1778) 26 

5-41 Pramada van ( ashok vatika ) destroyed (21 / 1799) 26 

5-42 Hanuman killed kinkar demons (44 / 1843) 27 

5-43 Ashok van chaityaprasad (temple) destroyed (25 /1868) 27 

5-44 Jambumali killed (20 / 1888) 28 

5-45 Killing of seven sons of the Ravan’s secretary (17 / 1905) 28 

5-46 Five army heads killed (41 / 1946) 28 

5-47 Akshkumar ( ) killed (38 / 1984) 29 

5-48 Indrajeet seized Hanuman (61 / 2045) 30 

5-49 Pondering Hanuman (20 / 2065) 31 

5-50 Prahast’s enquiry (19 / 2084) 31 

5-51 Recitation of Ram’s glory (45 / 2129) 32 

iii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Sundar kand 


5-52 Vibhishan interfered (28 / 2157) 32 

5-53 Tail set on fire (44/2201) 33 

5-54 Burning Lanka (51 / 2252) 34 

5-55 Hanuman’s anxiety (35 / 2287) 34 

5-56 Returning Hanuman (51 / 2338) 35 

5-57 Union of Hanuman with Angad and Jambavan (53 / 2391) 35 

5-58 Hanuman’s Lanka’s travelogue (169 / 2560) 36 

5-59 Hanuman exhorted monkeys (32 / 2592) 39 

5-60 Excited Angad (20 / 2612) 40 

5-61 Feast in madhuvan (24 / 2636) 41 

5-62 Complain to Sugriv (38 / 2664) 41 

5-63 Sugriv guessed the success in mission (33/ 2697) 41 

5-64 Arrival to Ram (45 / 2742) 41 

5-65 Recital about Sita (28 / 2770) 42 

5-66 Sorrowful Ram (15 / 2785) 43 

5-67 Sita’s message to Ram (44 / 2829) 43 

5-68 Sita’s apprehension narrated (29 / 2858) 44 


IV 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Srimate Ramanujaya namah 

Sundar kand 
(68 sarg) 


5-1 Flight across the sea (213 / 213) 

In order to develop sufficient momentum before taking off, Hanuman moved briskly over 
the top of mahendr mountain. He also kept applying pressure under his feet which 
created several new streams having water of various colours. The mountain coming to 
the state of swing caused wild animals to take shelter inside the caves making terrible 
sound. Enraged deadly serpents vomited poison breaking out ferocious fire. Splinters of 
stone pieces continued flying in air. 

Vidyadhar (celestial beings) who were inhabitants of the mahendr, quit the mountain. In 
haste, they left behind their drinks in golden pots, swords, and other precious household 
belongings. Their wives accompanied them producing musical notes from their anklets. 
Vidydahar were nicely dressed having sandal paste, red garlands, and lotus like 
charming eyes. Scared they stood outside in sky, while their pleasant wives continued 
smiling on their side. Watching anxiously towards the mountain, they heard Sidha, 
charan and sages, who had gathered in sky, saying, “Hanuman, the son of Vayu is in 
preparatory stage of a very arduous task, of taking a magnificent leap to Lanka. He is on 
a mission to find out Sita, wife of Ram. He has grown mountainous and is now about to 
take stride in the sky.” 

While, still in preparatory make up, he offered his respects to all gods: sun, Indr, 
Brahma, vayu and other gods. Keeping east face, he particularly made salutation with 
folded hands to his father, vayu. 

He spoke to his fellow monkeys, “I would find out Sita in Lanka. If she is not available 
there, I would go hunting all the heavens. In case I don’t find her, I would fetch Ravan in 
fetters, or else I would produce entire uprooted Lanka to Ram.” 

Hanuman, curling up his tail high, pressed both his arms against the side rocks, and 
pressing hard on his feet he rose in the sky. His take off momentum was so massive that 
a tempest took place around the mahenra (qfcrqiw). Heavy and light, small and large, 
all sorts of trees with fruits and flowers came along uprooted with him. Initial moments of 
his leaving the mountain, created a view as if moon like Hanuman was amidst the stars. 
Subsequently, the heavy trees dropped down in the sea, while the lighter ones bedecked 
with flowers still followed him in trails. The sea down below was covered with varieties of 
flowers dropping away from the trails set ablaze by him. Closely dotted with flowers, the 
sea looked like an inverted sky full of stars. Having air borne, cruising towards Lanka, 
both his hands were spread wide with fingers hissing like angry serpents. His mammoth 
form was like a brilliant speeding comet. His eyes glowed like sun and moon. The wind 
past his arm pits produced sound of thundering clouds. His shadow looked like a boat 
surfing over seawaters, while his body in the sky resembled the sail of the cruising boat. 


Page 1 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


He appeared like a flying mountain, and his shadow covered an area ten yojan wide and 
thirty yojan long (5-1-76). His high speed created such an impulsive wind pressure that 
sea water immediately below him changed to the shape of a large sized bowl. The bowl 
formation of water continued along his trajectory, i.e., with his moment to moment shift in 
position, the deep and wide bowl of water followed closely down below him over the sea 
surface. This gave a feeling of an automatic creation of channel over the sea surface 
indicating his line of movement in the sky. 

In his honour, gods and celestial beings showered flowers over him, while sages offered 
their prayer and good wishes for his success. Sun and wind had become modest 
facilitating his movement. 

Sea, recalling the gratefulness of Sagar, a king of the Ikshavaku family, felt obligatory to 
honour Hanuman who was on a mission of Ram, a glorious member of the same 
Ikshavaku house. He asked Mainak , a mountain inside sea, “Indr had deputed you here 
to block the route of the demons coming out from the nether world (5-1-92 / 93). You 
have been doing that successfully for long. I know your capability to expand in all 
directions. It is time for you to expand high in sky so that you can offer a rest place to 
Hanuman, who is speedily moving through sky on a special service to Ram.” 

When Mainak rose to the level of Hanuman, he thought rising of an obstacle, and he 
pushed that down with his chest. Mainak, in the guise of human being, appeared over 
the peak, and submitted to Hanuman, “Sea has been largely benefited and got enlarged 
due to efforts of one of the forefathers of Ram. Under that obligation, I have been sent 
by the sea, to honour you on your mission. My peaks are full of roots and fruits. You may 
pause here for some time to relax. Besides, I am here under my personal obligation to 
you. Earlier in satyug, like garud, the mountains had wings and used to fly from one 
place to another. Sages and other beings were always afraid of the calamity of falling of 
mountains over them. Indr took it seriously and he cut down the wings of the mountains. 

I was saved because of your father, vayu, who pushed me down deep in sea. Then 
onward, I stay 1 in sea and was saved against the tirade of Indr." Hanuman obliged him 
by touching and mentioned, “I don’t have time to take rest. I have assured my fellow 
monkeys that I wouldn’t take any rest before reaching Lanka.” 

This act of Hanuman won him praise from gods and sages. 

In order to confirm his strength, wit and intellect, gods sent Sursa (mother of nag, i.e., 
serpents) to Hanuman. Disguised as a fierce demoness, she stood obstructing the way 
of Hanuman. “I am hungry, and I ask you to enter my mouth, I would eat you” , spoke 
Sursa. Hanuman said, “Ram, the son of Dasarath had been staying in Dandkaranya with 
his wife Sita, and brother Lakshaman. Ravan abducted his wife to Lanka. I am on an 
urgent mission to Lanka. Having met Sita, and conveying her message to Ram, I would 


1 

It seems because of Mainak being present hiding in sea. Indr later assigned a duty to him, to bar the movement of 
demons through sea route. 


Page 2 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


be back to your service. Leave me now.” She didn’t heed, and stood before him with 
widely open mouth, “Brahma has blessed me that no one would escape me.” 

Her insistence irritated Hanuman, and he enlarged himself to ten yojan. In response, she 
opened her mouth to twenty yojan. When Hanuman got to thirty, her mouth went to 
forty; when he was fifty, she did it to sixty; when he was seventy, her mouth was eighty; 
on getting to ninety, she expanded to hundred yojan. Hanuman, instantly was in the size 
of a thumb, and getting fast into her mouth, he jumped out swiftly; then he mentioned, “I 
have obeyed your command of getting into your mouth.” 

Sursa was highly impressed by his witty potential, and appearing in her original form 
wished him all success in early completion of the sacred work of joining Ram and Sita 
together. 

Hanuman continued his onward journey cruising past the clouds. Soon he was spotted 
by a demoness called Sinhika. Impressed by his large body, she thought of adequate 
meat in him to keep her satisfied for a long time. She withheld him by catching his 
shadow and he was stalled. He became helpless, and when looked around could see 
her down over the sea water. He was reminded of the alert given by Sugirv. Gravitating 
his body, he enlarged also like rainy season cloud. Sinhika opened her mouth equal to 
his body. He fell into her mouth, and because of his heavy weight he succeeded in 
damaging her heart. Mutilating her into pieces, using his sharp nails, he came out 
successfully. She was dead, and the celestial beings showered praises over him and 
expressed their confidence of completing the intended work. 

When he reached on the other side of the sea, he could see Lanka surrounded by 
greeneries over the mountain top. Like the northern shore, several rivers joined the sea 
on its Lanka side shore also. 

He thought, “If I keep the same large body, the demons would notice my presence." 
Thinking thus, he got back to his normal body as Trivikram 2 bhagwan had withdrawn 
himself in his initial form. 

5-2 Entering strategy (58 / 271) 

Standing on the top of trikut mountain he took a panoramic view of Lanka. It was 
surrounded by trees and greeneries. The outer ramparts had a large ditch full of water. 
The demons on guard were fully equipped with bow and spears. The buildings were 
seven and storied high with golden pillars. The windows had golden grills and screens. 
Strolling slowly he came towards the northern gate which was made of gold and as high 
as sky. 


2 Valmiki was so much impressed by the Trivikrama and Vaman incarnation, that he fondly quotes this at several places in the 
Ramayan I 


Page 3 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Hanuman found Lanka as if a swimming object in air. Broadly it looked like a woman, 
“Ramparts as thighs, groves and sea as apparel, high structures as ear rings, etc.” 

Awesome view of the city created deep anxiety, and he thought even if the monkeys 
arrive here they won’t be able to enter this city. Only four of us, Angad, Neel, me and 
Sugriv would be able to get into it. 

Pondering thus, he thought of entering the city at night so that he could move around 
unnoticed. He was anxious to find out Sita and therefore thought, “If I enter in my normal 
form, the demons would kill me. The city is full of demons as if serpents are residing in 
bhogawatipuri (qt^ftgfr ) of the nether world. If I disguise as a demon, I would be 
detected. Let alone me, if wind god (vayu) also assumes a guise here he would be 
caught by the demons. Let me enter as a monkey but in the size of a cat.” 

It was after dusk, Hanuman, in a cat size, jumped over the ramparts near the entry gate. 
He looked very attractive in his cat size body. The night being moon lit facilitated his 
onward movement. 

5-3 Lankini surrendered (51 / 322) 

Hanuman had just entered and was again awestricken seeing the grand and heavily 
fortified Lanka which was situated on the peaks of the mountain called Lamb 3 . Seven / 
eight storied high buildings, with gold 4 finished windows and ramparts was the common 
scene of the city. The clouds impregnated with regular lightning (5-3-5) illuminated 5 the 
city and its streets. The green groves and wide streets were impressive. He thought, 
“This city is really impregnable. Only a few monkeys besides me: Kumud, Angad, 
Sushen, Maind, Dwid, Sugriv, Krishparva, and Jambvan would be able to manage their 
entry in this city.” When he thought about Ram and Lakshaman, he became more 
confident. 

In his initial moments he was detected by a demoness. She cried, “Who are you, and 
what do you want? Before you die tell the details.” Without getting cawed down, although 
he saw her terrifying form, asked about her identity first. She replied, “Deputed by 
Ravan, I am the manifestation of the city itself. Being on guard, nobody can enter here 
without my permission. Today I will end your life.” 

Hanuman, with an aim to create a deterrence in her mind, enlarged his body like a 
mountain and spoke to her, “I have a curiosity to see the groves, buildings, and royal 


3 A synonym of Trikut 

4 Special gold called Jambunad is mentioned at several places in Valmiki Ramayan. It seems to refer to the 
place where the best quality of gold is found. 

5 It seems the gods were at beck and call of Ravan, and they had to keep the city lighted. That is why ever present 
clouds consistently produced flashes of lightning. The clouds had been used as live generators to produce power and 
light for the city of Lanka. 


Page 4 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


premises of this city.” She objected and forbade him to enter the city. He again 
submitted, “O, gentle lady! Having a view of this city I would go back.” Hearing him 
speaking thus, she lost her temper and slapped Hanuman heavily. Hanuman also 
intimidating her with his terrifying grumble, clenched his left fist, and punched on her 
mildly. She was not able to sustain his punch, and fell over the ground. Hanuman was 
compassionate on her because she was a woman. Soon she lost her ego and anxiously 
mentioned , “Be kind on me. I was told by Brahma that when a monkey would subdue 
my potential, I should take that as an indication of imminent danger to demons. 
Brahma’s prediction can’t be changed. Because of Sita, devil Ravan has invited the end 
of the demons. You are welcome in this city, and move freely to find out Sita.” 

5-4 Wandering Hanuman (30 / 352) 

Moving ahead on the flower strewn streets, he saw closely that all the buildings were 
bright white. In majority of them he heard the sound of song and music. In some of them, 
which had mark of bolt at the entry, the windows were made of gems, instead of only 
gold. Some of the structures were in the shape of lotus, while others represented several 
different 6 categories found to be auspicious from vastu (scripture for structural 
orientation) (5-4-7) consideration. In some of them, demons were found to be carrying 
out oblation and recitation of mantra, while some others were doing their self studies, still 
some others were found engaged in practice of muscle flexing exercises. He noticed one 
hundred thousand security men on guard on the main streets. He found numerous spies 
moving in various appearances. The physical appearance of demons in Lanka varied 
from attractive to terrifying. 

At a remote location, he saw another magnificent premises situated at a majestic peak of 
Trikut. Getting closer to that he found that excellently decorated with natural greeneries. 
Free moving animals and birds enhanced the grandeur of entry. From all sides, the 
rampart was surrounded by wide ditches full of white lotus. The premises reverberated 
with sweet musical notes. This was the mansion of Ravan, and was closely guarded by 
valorous demons. 

5-5 Hanuman disappointed (27 / 379) 

The moon lit night was very impressive, and moon appeared to be invested with the 
auspiciousness of goddess Lakshmi, whose eternal abode is known in water floating 
lotuses, evening time ocean, and mandrachal on earth. The mark of deer horn (5-5-5) 
over moon was more distinct. He noticed moon appeared like a sovereign lion of the sky. 

He hunted into several mansions where demons were found enjoying with their consorts 
in a varieties of ways. The presence of musical notes was almost common in all the 


6 (i) Sarvato bhadra t|5 type is the most auspicious having doors in all the four cardinal directions, (ii) Vardhaman 

type bestows wealth and has doors in three directions except south, (iii) swastika wftrkti is the one which confers wealth and 

children has doors in three directions except east. 


Page 5 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


chambers. Despite his meticulous scouring of the mansions, he couldn’t locate Sita. This 
made him disappointed. 

5-6 Wandering resumed (44 / 423) 

He resumed the second round of his hunting. He saw the mansion of Ravan as the gem 
of all the mansions. It had pictures fixed with silvers, the doors and windows were of gold 
beautified by the carvings of gems. 

He freely leapt from one place to another. Going up to the terrace, he leapt to the house 
of Prahast. From there, one by one, he leapt watching their grandeur to the houses of 
Mahaparshv, Kumbhakarn, Vibhishan, Mahodar, Virupaksh, Viddyujjihn, Viddyunmali, 
Vajradanshtr, Shuk, Saran, Indrajeet, Jambumali, Sumali, Rashimketu, Suryashatru, 
Vajrakaya, Dhumraksh, Sampathi, Vidyudrup, Bheem, Ghan, Vighan, Shuknabh, Chakr, 
Shath, Kapat, Hrushwkarn, Danshtr, Lomush, Yudhonmatt, Matth, Dhwajgriv, Dwijihn, 
Hastimukh, Karal, Pishach, Shonitaksh. 

He entered the mansion of Ravan standing alone from other houses. He saw scores of 
demoness, demons, horses, elephants, chariots and palanquins ready to comply the 
command of the demon king. The demons in army contingent on duty were well built and 
bejeweled with jambunad gold. There were several secured and isolated chambers. 
Almost at all places he noticed the mood of gala and festivity; instrumental music as well 
as vocal songs with sweet melodies permeated the entire environment. 

5-7 Ravan’s palace and pushpak viman (17 / 440) 

Ravan’s brilliant white fort was set like lightning in the green wood backdrop of the 
surrounding marked by the presence of chirping birds. Abundance of gems and gold 
were used in the carvings of the windows. He saw several varieties of chambers, stores 
of weapons, conches, and bows. The houses were so magnificent which gave an 
impression as if May-danav had himself worked on them. 

His eyes fell on puhspak viman which was high like clouds, and had golden appearance. 
It looked like assembly of peaks of mountains covered with several categories of flowers 
and their fragrant pollen. It appeared like chariot being carried by royal swan. The gems 
and gold studs made it like sky full of stars. The precious stones and metals were used 
to create a delighting view of earth full mountains, trees with flowers and fruits, and lakes 
having lotuses. Emeralds, sliver, and coral pieces were skillfully used to create the view 
of birds, snakes, and horses. Various postures of birds were carved out, some of them 
appeared like flying, while others gave an impression of their idle state. Among several 
scenes depicted by carving, goddess lakshmi holding lotus flower in her hands, being 
worshipped by elephants offering flowers from their trunks were most attractive. 

Watching the scenes of caves and mountains used to enhance the grandeur of the 
pushpak, he was surprised. Soon his wandering spirit ebbed low when he didn’t find Sita 
anywhere. 


Page 6 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


5-8 Pushpak revisited (8 / 448) 

While standing in the centre of the house of the demon king, Hanuman again had a look 
at pushpak. Having built by celestial architect ( viswakama ) himself it was alone of its 
kind having no example to compare its grand aesthetic structure. When airborne, it gave 
an impression of another solar body passing through the sky route. 

Ravan had carried out penance for a long period with a steadfast state of mind, and as a 
result of that he was able to possess pushpak, This chariot was capable of moving in all 
directions, be it ground or air as wished by the rider in his mind. Its structure looked like 
peaks of mountains covered with trees and plants. The inside of the chariot was 
pleasant like cool and fragrant spring. 

5-9 Wandering inside the palace ( 73 / 521) 

The inner palace was one yojan long and half yojan wide. Wandering around, Hanuman 
entered the most inner and private palace of Ravan. It was surrounded by guards 
accompanied by tusker elephants; some elephants had four tusks, and some had three 
tusks only. His wives and those women who had been abducted, had made a large 
gathering inside as if multitude marine creatures staying in sea. The grandeur and 
affluence inside the palace were more than that possessed by varun, yam and kuber. 

Among several inside structures of the palace, pushpak stood alone . Viswakarma had 
built pushpak for the use of Brahma, but Kuber , by dint of his long and tough penance, 
obtained it from him. Ravan used his force, and captured pushpak from Kuber. Along 
with the statues of sheep, the pillars inside the pushpak were made of gold and silver. 
The steps and floors were made of gold and varying sizes of pieces of coral. Along with 
the precious stones, pink sandal wood had been beautifully blended to enhance the 
overall grandeur. Getting inside pushpak, Hanuman took the smell of several kinds of 
drink and food stored for serving. 

He was automatically dragged to the place where Ravan was present, and that portion 
of the palace was most favorite of Ravan. The chamber was fragrant with the smoke of 
aloe, and the screen of the smoke had shielded the original brilliance of the whiteness of 
the building. The natural scene and sceneries of the global earth was a common view. 
Getting inside was so soothing, that Hanuman felt as if he was deriving the comfort from 
the lap of mother. The grandeur of the place was found a little superior to that of heaven 
of Indr. The light of the lamps was mild and widely permeating. 

Thousands of beautifully dressed women were seen occupying their bed. The time was 
past midnight, and they were found sleeping intoxicated. Those sleeping women 
possessed the brilliance of bright stars, and this gave a deceptive understanding that all 
stars falling from heaven (meteorites) had gathered at Ravan’s personal chamber. The 
physical effort of the night dance, appeared to have caused the unfastening of their hair 
locks. Some of them had lost their anklets, while others were lying with dislodged lower 
and upper garments. Intoxicated women, enjoyed the fragrance coming from the face of 


Page 7 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


the next woman but had a false impression of close embracing of Ravan. Dancing 
women had fallen over ground intoxicated such that someone had laid her head over the 
chest of another fellow dancer, while the feet of some other rested over the chest of 
someone else. Their lying position had emerged like flowers of a garland on the floor, 
arms joining arms, and hair joining hair. All the women were won over by Ravan, and 
had offered their love to him. They appeared to hail from a good family background, 
were beautiful, and none was ugly or disabled. 

5-10 Sleeping Mandodari (54 / 575) 

Hanuman saw an isolated couch having a white umbrella over it. The couch had 
attractive finishes with precious gems and mattresses. Several charming women had 
surrounded the couch with fan and chavar in their hands. The couch was occupied by 
sleeping Ravan. He was beautifully dressed and bejeweled. His two arms looked like 
deadly snakes. His body was smeared with red and fragrant sandal paste. He was 
wearing a white silk as a lower garment, and the upper portion was covered with yellow 
silken drape. The breathing was so vigorous as if a mighty serpent continued hissing. 
Sweet fragrance had permeated around Ravan. On the nearby floor of his couch, young 
women were found sleeping under heavy influence of liquor. Most of them had clung 
closely with the musical instruments they had played. Away from them, he saw another 
couch over which a woman of exquisite beauty was found sleeping. She was Mandodari, 
but he mistook her as Sita. Thinking her to be Sita, he became so much excited, that he 
climbed up and jumped down several times from the nearby pillars. 

5-11 Thoughtful Hanuman (48 / 623) 

Soon Hanuman could reason back, “I am sure, Sita, the sacred woman, can never adopt 
the life style of demons, and therefore my guessing this woman as Sita is wrong." He 
continued his search and saw several varieties of meat arranged in order of readiness. 
Some bowls contained meat of peacock, chicken, pig, deer and other animals mixed 
with curd and salt. Several varieties of drinks prepared from honey ( madira ), sura (from 
fruits), and pushpasava from flowers were stacked for ready use. 

In the meanwhile, it occurred to him, “In the past I never raised my eyes to women, but 
here I am so minutely watching them. This violates the code of ethical conduct, and I am 
a sinner. Soon he got reflections of counter thought, “Although I have glanced minutely 
over women, I didn’t nurse any lust or other malice against them. This suggests I am still 
composed with my steadfast state of mind, and I never committed any heinous or sinful 
act. After all, if I don’t search Sita among women, where shall I found her? She has to 
be hunted among women.” 

5-12 Puzzled Hanuman (25 / 648) 

Moving around, from one place to other he continued hunting her. Sadness gripped him, 
and he thought, “I have spent the time without any output. I am sure, when I would be 
back without any news of Sita, Sugriv will kill me.” After a while, he got the tides of good 


Page 8 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


thought and became glad, “Sadness is a killer. I won’t be able to attain my target if I yield 
to disappointment. I need to be energetic cheerful.” 

He continued his search once again, and he passed through several other groups of 
women of nag dynasty who have been won over by the demon king. Sita was not seen 
anywhere. Again the despondency seized him, and he guessed, “Being a righteous 
woman, she must have rejected the demons style of life and their solicitations. 
Consequently, demons must have eliminated Sita by now. My journey to like is now 
futile.” 

5-13 Hanuman in dual mind (69 / 717) 

He again vigorously searched her leaping from place to another. His pessimism again 
rose high, “Sampathi had indicated her to be here, but there is no trace of her. How can I 
find her. It seems while being abducted she leaped down on way and lost her life. 
Possibility is of her slipped down to sea also. Else, she could have been devoured by 
Ravan’s other demoness wives. If I go to Kishkindha with negative news, Ram would 
end his life. In grief Lakshaman, Bharat, and thus all brothers would end their life. Sugriv 
would never bear the shock of losing Ram. He would end his life. His wife, Ruma would 
follow him. Tara also won’t live any more. Loss of parents would lead Angad also to 
suicide." 

Foreseeing the chain of actions of losing lives, Hanuman rethought, “I won’t go back. I 
would stay here as an ascetic. Better I would enter fire and sacrifice my life than cause 
others to lose their lives.” 

In the next turn of thoughts, he planned, “to kill Ravan, or else take him captive to Ram.” 
He again became cheerful and thought of beginning the search in the nearby grove, 
ashok vatika which was surrounded by another ring of forest. He guessed and got 
alarmed of strict security around ashok vatika. 

5-14 Hanuman in ashok vatika (52 / 769) 

Jumping down from the palace of Ravan, he scaled up the fencing of ahsok vatika. 
Leaping inside down of the magnificent grove he was pleased by the natural resources. 
Birds and deer created scene of visual delight. Fruit and flower bearing trees, dancing 
peacocks gave him lot of pleasure. He found several small and large groves surrounding 
several buildings. Due to his inherent nature, he shook several of the fruit and flower 
laden trees. Some of the flowers fell down by movement of his tail. When those trees 
lost their flowers and fruits, birds deserted them for another trees. Wandering ahead, he 
found lakes with banks made of gems and sand bed strewn with coral pieces. At a 
distant place, a large mountain with several peaks and a stream descending down were 
seen. Sandal and other plants of fragrance were found at regular intervals. He thought, 
“Getting impressed by the natural of birds, flowers, trees, lakes and streams Sita would 
be visiting them to ventilate her grief of separation from Ram.” 


Page 9 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


He spotted a large ashok tree full of leaves and flowers. He climbed up that tree with an 
aim to have a panoramic view of a larger area. 

5-15 Sita spotted (54 / 823) 

When Hanuman continued watching from that majestic ashok tree, he located rows of 
other ashok trees thousands in number. Among those trees, some shined like gold, 
some had brilliance of fire, while others looked dark green. Flower laden ashok trees 
had the tips of the branches touching the ground. The groves were as beautiful as 
nandanvan of heaven, and chaitrarath of kuber. The flower trees and plants (punag , 
chitvan, and champa ) of larger girth were common, and they caused sweet fragrance all 
around. 

His eyes, soon found a circular building standing over thousands of pillars. The steps 
and floors were made of gems and gold was used to beautify the pillars. Next to this, his 
attention caught a woman surrounded by demoness. She looked like a glowing fire 
amidst smoke. She was draped in yellow silken sari, appeared to be used for long. In her 
lean and thin constitution, her face had become pale as if rohini asterisrn) was 
afflicted by mars (jfm ) 5-15-22. Like a deer she was found to be trapped by hounds. 
Single matted lock of hair was as if a snake hanged down over her back. She had a rare 
beauty beating that of rati, the consort of cupid. 

He recalled what Ram had depicted about her. She was found to be with only those 
jewels which Ram had indicated. She had earrings (like canine teeth), and bracelets of 
gems. The jewels which she had dropped to monkeys at rishyamuk were absent. The 
cloth containing those dropped jewels was identical to her yellow sari. 

Her first hand appearance caused Hanuman to imagine, as if she resembled, “hazy 
memory, fallen treasure ( ridhi ), broken faith, shattered hope, partial accomplishment 
(sidhi), shaky wit, and falsely defamed glory. Her physical state represented a dormant 
intellect shorn of practice, and words bereft of syntax and grammar.” Making such 
reflections, Hanuman could identify her, “She is that Sita for whom Ram suffered 
immensely and passed through several stages of compassion for a woman, mercy for a 
dependent, shock of separation, and love for a beloved wife.” 

Hanuman became glad when he was confirmed of all her eligibilities deserving to 
become the consort of Ram. 

5-16 Her afflictions grieved Hanuman (32 / 858) 

Although sita appeared sorrowful, still she betrayed a sort of composed mind. Hanuman 
found her matching with the qualities of Ram. He continued pondering, “It was for this 
Sita, that Ram killed Vali, Kabandh, Khar, Dushan, Trirshira (with fourteen thousand 
demons), and Viradh. She is infallible in observing her chastity. Rightly so, because of 
being daughter of Janak, king of Mithila. Her advent took place when she appeared from 
the earth smeared with clay while the tip of the ploughshare hit the ground. She became 
daughter in law of great king Dasarath. For sake of her unflinching love in Ram, she 


Page 10 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


discarded the royal luxuries and joined him in his forest banishment. She always relished 
the food of roots and fruits." 

He thought, “It is due to her abiding affection with Ram, that despite immense torture of 
Ravan she is still alive. She neither looks to demoness nor to the fruit bearing trees, 
rather she is steadfast in contemplation of Ram. Her tolerance is like that of earth, and 
possessed of rare beauty and lotus eyes, she is alive anticipating re-union with Ram. 
Alas, although protected by Ram and Lakshaman, the demon king caused so much of 
miseries on her. For her sake I crossed the sea, and it would be still appropriate if Ram 
destroys the entire globe to redeem her. Ashok has bent down from flower loads as if 
mourning for pitiable plight of Sita. Shishir ended, and spring has set in (5-16-31). The 
moon of spring is although cool, but for her it is painful like hot sun.” 

5-17 Cheerful Hanuman (32 / 890) 

For Hanuman, it was second night (5-17-1) in Lanka. The moon was substantially up in 
the sky and its cool light helped him in looking at Sita. While looking at those demoness, 
who surrounded her, he had a terrifying view, “Some of them were one eyed, some had 
only one ear, some had ear large enough to cover the whole body, some had ears like 
erect spikes. Some had nose fixed on forehead, some had blanket of her own hair, some 
had head in abdomen (like Kabandh). Their mouth resembled to several wild animals, 
viz., boar, buffalo, goat, and jackal. Some were equipped with axe and pestle, while 
others had a thick coat of flesh and blood over their body.” 

Sita occupied the root of one of the ashok trees, while demoness sat in a ring around 
her. Becoming sure of locating Sita, he became glad and cheerful and her eyes were full 
of cool tears. Mentally he bowed his head to Ram and Lakshaman and stayed watching 
from the tree. 

5-18 Ravan at ashok vatika (32 / 922) 

The night passed into its last quarter. Lanka woke up for routine ved path (recitation of 
scriptures) in the dwelling units of brahm-rakshasa who offered sacrifices in fire. Ravan 
was awakened with playing of auspicious musical instruments. Waking up, he thought 
about Sita, and getting dressed up, moved to ashok vatika. Enjoying the natural pleasure 
of the royal park, dotted with several lakes and aviary zoos, he entered the grove where 
Sita was staying. Hundreds of beautiful wives accompanied him. He was served with 
fans, golden lamp, and other royal provisions of water pots, seating furniture, and sweet 
drinks. 

Hanuman heard the sweet notes of anklets of those women and also saw bright burning 
sticks leading the contingent moving with Ravan. The dress of Ravan was milky white 
having borders of pearls. He looked intoxicated and entered the zone called pramada 
van (5-18-27) of ashok vatika. Although Hanuman had earlier seen him in his palace, he 
was very much impressed by his physique and royal style. To have closer look at him, 
Hanuman descended to a lower branch of the tree he had earlier occupied. 


Page 11 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


5-19 Sorrowful Sita (22 / 944) 

When Sita noticed Ravan’s arrival, she trembled like banana leaves. Out of fear and 
modesty, she covered her abdomen with thighs, and breast with arms. She was sitting 
on the ground and looked like a fallen branch of a tree. She was born and wedded in 
royal family, but her Lanka detention had subdued her facial radiance and she appeared 
sorrowfully pale. Firm in her resolve, riding the mental chariot, she always retained 
oneness of her identity with Ram. She was grieved in separation as rohini is afflicted by 
ketu (5-19-9). She resembled like a freshly broken lotus thrown over ground. 

5-20 Ravan’s pursuance (36 / 980) 

Ravan tried to impress upon her, “Abducting women is the accepted practice of demons. 
I brought you through abduction, but I would never force my intention upon you until you 
wish to come around with me. You shouldn’t resort to fast, sleeping over ground, and 
remain in dirty cloths. Once you accept my proposal you will never find anything lacking. 
You are the single creation of Brahama, and after you he didn’t produce any woman of 
your rare beauty. Your each and every organ is so beautiful that when I look at any one 
of them, I can’t shift my gaze to the other one. All beautiful women of my palace will 
stand your waitress as you will be the single empress of my kingdom. The gems brought 
by me from various expeditions shall be in your possession. I promise to offer the best of 
states of my kingdom to your father Janak, if you so wish me to do. An ascetic Ram 
wouldn’t be able to get an access to securely located Lanka. I wonder he would be found 
alive. This ashok vatika is so secured that barring me, no other creature despite their 
capability to change their form readily, would find entry here. I pray you to dress up 
yourself to your satisfaction and come with me. Wastage of further time is not going to 
help you.” 

5-21 Sita warned Ravan (34 / 1014) 

Hearing Ravan’s solicitations, Sita was pained to the core of her heart. Using a blade of 
grass as screen and divider between her and Ravan, she spoke mildly, “As you protect 
your own wives, you need to take care of the chastity of a woman who is wedded to 
other person. Your lust to other’s wife will cause your end. It seems Lanka is devoid of 
sensible persons who could counsel you on code of ethics ( dharm of a married life). 
Even if ethical persons are in Lanka, it seems, you don’t bother to heed their words. 
When a sinner like you is eliminated, people rejoice, and same will happen in your case.” 

She further reminded him, “The elimination of demons’ contingent from Janasthan gave 
you enough indication of the potential of Ram. Afraid to face him, you stole me away in 
his absence. The mighty shafts of Ram and Lakshaman will end you with your demons’ 
Lanka, as the sun rays dry up the ditches. As trivikram bhagwan through striding three 
steps dispossessed the demons of their dominance and retrieved the splendor to gods, 
my lord Ram will redeem me from you. If you wish to enjoy a safer life, I advise you to 
surrender me to Ram, and mend your relations with him.” 


Page 12 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


5-22 Ravan’s ultimatum (46 / 1060) 

Hearing Sita’s contemptible words, Ravan spoke to her, “My sweet words have failed to 
win your heart. I had been from sweet to sweeter to you, but contrarily you became from 
harsh to harsher to me. Even if you are harsher, my fond desire to own you doesn’t allow 
me to take extreme action against you. I remind you, still you are left with two more 
months (5-22-8) of the grace period indicated earlier to you, and if you don’t comply to 
my command, the pieces of your body will be served by my cooks in delicious dishes.” 

Ravan’s threat grieved the daughters of gandharva and gods and they tried to console 
Sita through their quiet physical indications. Encouraged by their silent support, Sita 
spoke to Ravan, “I am wife of righteous Ram, and daughter-in-law of Dasarath. Your 
tongue should have fallen down before uttering such dirty words against me. Your willful 
behavior will be rigorously responded when you will face Ram. You are such a 
shameless fellow, that I was stolen away after deceitfully cajoling my husband away 
from me, and you take this as your valorous performance. If you were really valorous 
why didn’t you face him in the forest. Using the potency of my penance I could have 
burnt you to ashes, but neither I have permission of Ram, nor I want to waste my 
power.” 

Ravan got angry, his tongue flashed like fire, and eyes had become red. Swinging crown 
over his head made him taller. His body was anointed with sandal, and was bearing 
varieties of chains of gems and armlets of gold. His apparel was red with red flower 
garland around his neck. Black piece of cloth draped around his waist looked as serpent 
Vasuki coiled over mandarachal during churning of ocean. His body was mountainous 
and two arms looked like peaks of mandarachal. The red and yellow earrings, hued as 
rising sun, appeared as if ashok trees had enhanced the splendor of hilly terrain. Thus 
dressed, he looked like manifestation of spring, but the overall impression was that of a 
decorated altar made ready for a victim of capital punishment. 

Hissing like a serpent, he addressed the demonesses on guard who had terrifying 
features. Some of them had one eye, some had one ear, some had ear as large to cover 
the full body, some had ear of either cow or elephant, and some had no ear. They had 
legs of configurations of animals, viz., elephant, cow, and horse. Some had no nose, 
while mouths of some of them looked like lion, boar, and cow. Some had large tongue 
and nails. He asked them, “Using tactical skills of sam (praise), dan (gift), bhed 
(confusion), and dand (punishment) try to bring her around.” After this, when he began 
roaring again with his gaze fixed at Sita, two of his wives, Mandodari and Dhanymalini 
came to him and embraced him closely. They tried to divert his attention from Sita, “This 
woman, of ill luck is not destined to enjoy the royal luxuries.” Surrounded by his wives 
Ravan went back to his palace. 

5-23 Demonesses’ efforts (19 / 1079) 

After the departure of Ravan, deomonesses made their efforts to reason around Sita to 
accept the demon king as her husband. One of them, called Ekjata spoke, “Listen, O, 


Page 13 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Sita! Pulastya is the fourth among six 7 of the prajapati (primordial forefathers of human 
race). His son is Vishrava, who got Ravan 8 as his son. You know Ravan is the king of 
demons and you should marry him." 

Thereafter, another demoness having grey eyes of a cat, called by the name Harijata 
tried to convince Sita, “Ravan has defeated Indr and other thirty three gods ( 12 aditya, 8 
vasu, 11 mdr, and 2 aswinikumar). You are lucky to have him as your husband. He is ready to 
desert his loveliest among queens, Mandodari for your sake.” 

Vikata, another demoness, told her, “Ravan has defeated all gandharv, nag and demons 
of the world. It is your ill luck that you reject him.” 

Yet another among them, named Durmukhi, spoke to Sita, “Ravan is such a formidable 
personality that in his presence, sun becomes cool, trees offer flowers, mountains create 
springs, and clouds bring shower. He is king of demons, and you should readily agree to 
become his wife, otherwise you will lose your life.” 

5-24 Demonesses’ threats (47 / 1126) 

Those demonesses gathered around her and renewed their threat, “Your husband is a 
human being, he is poor and exiled, why do you still like him? The demon king would 
provide you all the royal facilities, and it your ill luck and you have lost your balance.” 

Sita replied to them, “I love my poor husband, and despite all adversities I won’t desert 
him in my life.” Renewing her loyalty to Ram, gem of Ikshavaku dynasty, she cited 
several exemplary eternal couples, “Sachi and Indr, Arundhati and Vashishath, Rohini 
and Chandrma, Lopmudra and Agastya, Sukanya and Chyavan, Savitri and Satyavan, 
Srimati and Kapil, Madyant and Saudas, Keshini and Sagar, Damayanti (daughter of 
Bheem) and Nal (king of Nishadh).” 

Sita’s firm reply enraged the demonesses once again and they began intimidating her in 
many ways. Sita, leaving that tree, shifted to the tree of Hanuman and took her seat near 
the root. The demonesses followed her there also and made a ring around her. Vinata, 
one of the most terrifying in appearance, spoke to Sita, “Extreme of everything is bad. 
You have demonstrated enough loyalty to your human husband. You should now accept 
the demon king and make your life pleasant. Like Swaha wife of Agni, and Sachi wife of 
Indr, you will remain endearing to Ravan. If you don’t listen to our words, we will soon 
devour you. ” 

One after another, viz., Vikata, Chandodari, Praghasa, Ajamukhi, Surpnakha threatened 
her, “We will intimate Ravan that you died, and therefore, we ate her body. We will now 
arrange wine, because eating flesh enhances the taste of wine. Thereafter we will 
present dance in front of goddess Nikumbhila." 


7 Marichi, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, and Kratu 

8 Ravan literally means the one who makes weep his enemies. 


Page 14 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


5-25 Wailing Sita (20 / 1146) 

Terrified by the demonesses she lost her balance and began weeping with tearful eyes, 
“You do what you like. You eat me alive, but I would never desert my husband, Ram.” 
Wailing thus, she got up and took support of a branch of the ashok tree. Suddenly she 
fell in fit over the ground like stem of a banana plant. She wailed crying, “Alas! Ram, 
Lakshaman, my mothers-in-law Kauslya and Sumitra. The destiny is so strong, that 
despite all my unbearable agonies, I am not able to discard my life. I have been badly 
trapped by these evil demonesses." 

5-26 Sita sought to end life (49 / 1195) 

She continued her wailing and recalling past events decided to end her life. She 
mentioned loudly, “Ravan used Mareech to deceive Ram and in his absence abducted 
me. My husband killed Viradh, and how could he wait so long! Sure, he doesn’t have 
idea of my location. Jatayu, although old fought Ravan well, but, alas ! he was killed by 
the devil demon. Otherwise, Jatayu could have intimated about me. Ram can’t be 
deterred by sea, if he knew about my location. His mighty shafts are capable of drying 
the sea either. I wonder whether Ravan managed to kill both the brothers. I am so ill luck 
that my life force doesn’t cooperate me, and I am not able to discard my body. I am sure, 
the way I am crying today, the demonesses of Lanka would soon begin crying and 
wailing when the demons would be killed by Ram. Being separated from Ram, I am in 
horrible clutch of Ravan, and I must take initiatives to end my life." 

5-27 Trijata’s dream (54 / 1249) 

Demonesses became angry over Sita’s expression. Some of them went to intimate 
Ravan about her, while others renewed their torturous threat to Sita. In the meanwhile, 
Trijita, an old demoness had just got up from night’s sleep. She forbade the other 
demoness, “Don’t repeat any more threat to Sita” , and narrated her dream in detail to 
them, “Ram clad in white dress, having white flower garland around his neck, riding a 
white chariot made of white tusks being carried by one thousand horses has arrived by 
sky route with his brother Lakshaman. I saw Sita over a white peak of a mountain 
surrounded by sea. Ram met her there as if sun has met its brilliance. Later I also saw 
him with Lakshaman mounting an elephant having four tusks. They proceeded towards 
Sita staying over the white peak mountain. Ram held her by hand and she joined him on 
the elephant. From there Sita leapt up in the sky, and wiped the face of sun and moon. 
Thereafter the elephant carrying them arrived and stood over Lanka. I also saw that 
Ram dressed in white cloths, wearing white flower garland, with Lakshaman and Sita 
have arrived here in a chariot being pulled by eight white oxen. Another scene following 
this demonstrated all three (Ram, Lakshaman and Sita) riding radiant pushpak viman 
moving northwards. Thus I had holy view of Ram (equivalent to Vishnu), Lakshaman and 
Sita." 

Mentioning the terrifying dream about Ravan she spoke, “Ravan, in shaven head, 
bathed in oil, wearing red cloths and garland of karveer flower, had fallen down from 


Page 15 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


pushpak. A black woman dragged him. Again, in another scene, he was seen in red 
dress with red flower garland, mounting a chariot pulled by asses. He drank oil, laughed, 
and danced like mad persons. He was then seen riding an ass and moving towards 
south. I saw him falling from the ass with his down towards ground. Thereafter, he 
moved naked, shouting evil words and entered a filthy pond full of excreta. Later, I saw 
him moving south and entered a pond without mud, but a black woman smeared with 
mud, dressed in red cloth, dragged him southward through the snooze around his neck. 
His brother Kumbhakarn, and Indrajeet along with other sons of Ravan were seen 
shaven head, and bathed in oil. Ravan rode a boar, Indrajeet rode a crocodile, while 
Kumbhakarn had mounted a camel. 

Trijata further detailing her dream spoke to them, “In Lanka, only Vibhishan bearing 
white cloth, white flower garland, smearing white sandal was seen under a white 
umbrella. He was greeted with sweet sound of conch, drum and other musical 
instruments. Along with his four ministers he was seen in sky riding an elephant of four 
tusks. The other demons of Lanka were seen bearing red cloth, red garlands and 
drinking oil. The city of Lanka with horses, elephants and chariots and broken gates was 
seen submerged in sea.” 

Breaking the bad dreams, Trijata mentioned, “I saw a mighty monkey has burnt Lanka to 
ashes. The demonesses are intoxicated and drinking oil they created loud laugheers. 
Kumbhakarn with other demons in red cloth have entered a pond of dung.” 

Trijata, thereafter, advised the demonesses, “You should beg for mercy from Sitio. She 
is very compassionate and in one salutation she will pardon all of you. If you please her 
she can protect you safe from the impending calamity of Lanka. Her present state of 
sorrow is transitory and would soon be over like shade falling over moon during eclipse 
(5-27-48). I see good omens around her. Her left eye, left arm, and left thigh are seen 
twitching. The birds over the tree, opposite her tree, are creating sweet melody as if they 
stand to auspiciouss welcome.” 

Hearing all this from the mouth of Trijata, Sita assured those demonesses full safety if 
the forebodings come true. 

5-28 Sita intent to self immolate (19 / 1268) 

Her state of grief of separation from Ram was further compounded by the repeated 
threat of devil demonesses. She lamented over the infallible decree of fate, “It was ill 
luck that I forced upon two brothers to fetch that illusory deer. It seems the demon 
disguised as deer had killed both the brothers. So far in this life, whatever penance and 
sacred performances I have done, nothing helped in reaping auspiciousness. I am being 
tortured by devils and the period of two months seems to be too short for Ram to arrive 
here. I may not be able to sustain the torture anymore, and I should either take deadly 
poison or use some weapon to end my life. But none would facilitate the provision of 
either of these two elements. “ 


Page 16 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Lastly she took the hair lock in her hand and thought of using that to help fasten her 
throat tightly (5-28-17) to end her life. With this intention when she stood up holding one 
of the branches of the tree, she noticed several auspicious omens indicating end of her 
sorrow and grief. 

5-29 Auspicious omens of Sita (8 / 1276) 

A wealthy person is attended by host of servants, similarly several auspicious indications 
frequented over her vital organs. The throbbing of left eye brow was so vigorous as if a 
lotus was shaken by fish. Her left arm, and left thigh suddenly twitched to confirm the 
auspicious forthcoming happenings. As she stood below that tree, her silken wrapper 
(sari) slightly slipped down indicating further auspiciousness. Occurrences of these 
good omens caused rejuvenating pleasure in her heart. 

5-30 Contemplative Hanuman (44 / 1320) 

By now Hanuman was well acquainted with the state of sorrow of Sita, torture by 
demonesses, and dreams of Trijata. He had also witnessed the behavior of Ravan with 
Sita. 

Having them in mind, he thought of consoling Sita, “Among several thousands and 
millions of monkeys, I am alone to get success in locating Sita, and have collected 
enough details of Lanka and Ravan. She had never earlier been put to such terrifying 
living conditions. In presence of these devils, how could I meet and talk to her. Unless I 
talk to her what message shall I carry for Ram. I have to make all efforts to talk to her 
before end of tonight or otherwise she might end her life. What language should I use? If 
disguised as a brhamin, I speak in Sanskrit, she might take me as agent of Ravan. If I 
appear as a monkey and talk to her like a human being, she might further be scared for 
she have been constantly terrified by demonesses so far. She might begin crying as if 
Ravan has reappeared before her, and her cry would invite the gathering of 
demonesses. Surrounded by them I might have to face encounter and there would arise 
a situation when I might have to fight the selected guards and warrior demons of Lanka. 
The outcome of fighting with demons could be uncertain with several probabilities: (i) if I 
win, but they might kill Sita, (ii) If I lose, I might languish here as a prisoner.” 

Contemplating on all pros and cons, he thought of reciting Ram’s glory to her from the 
hide out over the tree, expecting this would help him in winning her confidence. 

5-31 Hanuman’s initiative (19 / 1339) 

Hanuman recited in an audible sweet voice, “Dasarath is a renowned king in the dynasty 
of Ikshvaku. He is known for his penance, sacrifices, compassion, and valorous records. 
Ram is his eldest son who is an accomplished archer and is endowed with handsome 
personality. In order to honour the words of his aged father, Ram came to stay in forest 
with his brother Lakshaman and wife Sita. He killed scores of devil demons including the 
most notorious ones Khar and Dushan of Janasthan. To settle scores with Ram, Ravan 
stole away his wife in his absence while he was cajoled away by another demon 


Page 17 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Mareech disguised as an illusory deer. To help facilitate redeem Sita from Ravan, Ram 
forged friendship with Sugriv, a monkey, when he arrived in Matang van (forest) 
searching Sita. Sugriv has been crowned as king of monkeys, after killing of Vali by 
Ram. On the initiative of Sugriv, monkeys have been sent in all quarters to locate Sita. I 
am also one of them, and as advised by Sampathi (vulture brother of Jatayu), crossed 
one hundred yojan of sea and reached in Lanka. Here, I find Sita identical to the mental 
picture illustrated by Ram, before I had left for this mission.” 

Saying thus Hanuman became quiet. Sita, highly impressed by the recitation, removed 
her curly and lustrous hair fallen over her face, and began gazing carefully, up and 
down, in all directions. Lo and behold! her vision stopped over a brilliant eyed monkey, 
hiding behind leaves perched on one of the branches. 

5-32 Contemplative Sita (14 / 1353) 

In first reaction, she got surprised to see a monkey who was having a large and 
terrifying body. Scared, she had a swoon, and when she regained normalcy she sighed, 
“Hey Ram, Hey Ram, Hey Lakshaman.” 

In fear, while she was weeping, she saw the monkey coming with humility towards her 
and taking his seat near her. She thought, “This may be a dream, but the dream (5-32-9) 
of monkey is considered to indicate bad omen.” 

In anxiety, she offered prayer for the well being of Ram, Lakshaman and his father 
Janak. Further she thought, “How can I have a dream, for I have never 9 slept (5-32-10) 
after separation from Ram, and continue reflecting on Ram only." 

She was puzzled, and not able to believe her eyes. To ward off the confusion she 
prayed Brihaspati, Indr, Brahma and agni (fire god) and wished for the truth in the words 
of the monkey. 

5-33 Hanuman initiated dialogue (31 / 1384) 

Hanuman, having coral coloured face, climbed down the ashok tree, and coming close 
to her submitted softly, “Who are you, standing by the branch of ashok , and why do you 
continue weeping? Are you one of gods, demons, nag, gandharva, yaksh, kinnar, rudr, 
marudgan, or vasu ? Are you rohini wife of moon and have descended on earth?, or else, 
are you Arundhati ? Does your weeping due to loss of some family members? Since you 
stand over ground, I doubt taking you as one of gods. Your physique suggests you to be 
one of the descendants of a royal family. If you are Sita, abducted by Ravan from 
Janasthan, I wish all auspiciousness upon you. From outer appearance of a mendicant 
immersed in sorrow, I assume you are great wife of Ram.” 


9 


Sita never slept after she left panchvati (5-32-10). 


Page 18 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Sita, highly impressed by the recitation of glory of Ram, spoke to him, “I am Sita, wife of 
Ram, daughter-in-law of Dasarath, and daughter of Janak. I with Ram enjoyed royal life 
at Ayodhya for twelve 10 years after our marriage. In the thirteenth year, king Dasarath, 
on recommendation of his guru, Vashishath, made all preparations to crown Ram as 
successor Prince. Before coronation could take place, Queen Kaikeyi, co-wife of 
Dasarath, claimed two boons pending due with the king Dasarath. She asked for exile of 
Ram to forest, and crown for her son, Bharat. Ram honored his father, Dasarath’s words 
and proceeded to forest entrusting me to his mother. I can’t stay without him even in 
heaven, and therefore, proceeded to forest preceding his movement. Ram’s brother, 
Lakshaman, also joined him while leaving for forest. Being true to the words, we entered 
the forest which we had never seen earlier. Devil demon, Ravan, abducted me, the wife 
of splendorous Ram from the forest. The demon has granted me life for two months, and 
on lapse of this period I have to end my life.” 

5-34 Skeptical Sita (40 / 1424) 

Hearing grief stricken words of Sita, Hanuman spoke to her, “I am a messenger of Ram. 
I am here on his command to find out your location and well being. Since separation he 
is equally grief stricken. Lakshaman has also offered his respectful salutation to your 
lotus feet.” 

When Sita heard the names of Ram and Lakshaman, she became excited and 
mentioned, “The old saying appears to be true; one who holds life may get pleasure after 
lapse of hundreds of years.” 

Both, Hanuman and Sita, enjoyed their chance meeting. They continued their 
conversation, and in this process Hanuman’s initiative of getting closer and closer to Sita 
raised an element of doubt in her mind, “This monkey is Ravan himself. I have seen his 
deceptive form of an ascetic in Janasthan. Now, he has come in the form of monkey.” 
Sita, gripped by fresh spell of despair, sat over ground. She was so much fearful and 
afraid of Ravan, that when Hanuman offered his salutation on her feet, she couldn’t look 
towards him. 

Observing Hanuman’s continued salutation to her she expressed her feeling, “If you are 
Ravan, in a new disguise, your ill intention will not yield benefits to you at all. I presume 
you are the same Ravan who was in Janasthan in the deceitful guise of an ascetic. You 
are capable of assuming any form as per your wish, and you are again here to torture 
me. But I doubt my thinking, and it seems I am wrong, because I feel inner pleasant 
excitement when I see you. O, excellent monkey ! If you are really a messenger of Ram, 
continue reciting his glory, for I derive immense solace on hearing about him. I am really 
fortunate to meet a monkey who narrates Ram’s glory. But I again doubt and take this 
entire development as a dream or my mental hallucination. Reflecting for a while, again I 
see in reality a monkey before me, so this can’t be a dream. Recalling past events, I am 


10 Sita stayed for 12 yrs (5-33-17) after marriage at Ayodhya, and in the 13 th year (5-33-18) she departed to forest. Refer also 
Aronyo kand (3-47-4 / 5). 


Page 19 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


sure you are Ravan who has reappeared in a new guise with the sole intention of 
deceiving me again.” 

When Sita became quiet, Hanuman spoke to her, “Ram has all the attributes learnt to be 
possessed by kuber, chandrama, Vishnu, Brihaspati, and Kamdev. He would soon kill 
devil Ravan, and redeem you back. I convey his and Lakshaman’s message to you 
seeking your well being. It gives me utmost satisfaction to see you alive. I am Hanuman, 
advisor of Sugriv, king of mighty monkeys. Both Sugriv and Lakshaman, keep on 
discussing about you. You should discard your doubts about my being Ravan himself. 
Trust me, I am messenger of Ram, and crossing vast sea had entered Lanka keeping 
my foot over the head of Ravan (5-34-39).” 

5-35 Winning Sita’s confidence (90 / 1514) 

To reassure herself, Sita asked Hanuman, “If you are a true messenger, tell me the 
special features of Ram and Lakshaman. How did you know them, and how did Sugriv 
become his friend ?” 

Hanuman was glad to hear her queries. He submitted, “I am fortunate to recite Ram’s 
glory again and again. Ram is full of divine qualities. He shines like sun, his talent is that 
of Brihaspati, his glories are identical to Indr, and he is protector of all the beings. He is 
righteous, and honors the four-fold 11 social structure ( 5-35-ll)of the society. He 

has abiding qualities of adherence to moral conducts and helping the righteous beings. 
He is well versed in divine knowledge contained in all the Vedas and religious scriptures. 
His body is well built: radiant moon face, wide shoulder, trunk arm, conch neck, bluish 
hued complexion, and melodious voice. His voice, gait, and navel are stable and deep. 
Three folds of his neck and abdomen are attractive. The sole, palm, eye corners, and 
nail have reddish reflections. Four horizontal parallel lines run across the forehead and 
the root of thumb. He is four cubit 12 tall (5-35-18). There are fourteen twin 13 limbs and 
each unit of the pair is identical. Ten of his organs, eyes, face, mouth, tongue, lips, 
chest, nails, hand and feet are charming like lotus. Both the brothers, Ram and 
Lakshaman are handsome except their complexion. Lakshaman is fair and golden 
bright, where as Ram is pleasing blue hued.” 

Hanuman continued his narration about Sugriv, “While searching you with great 
anxiousness, they arrived at the foot of rishyamuk mountain. Both of them are archers 
carrying bow and quiver, and they remain in an ascetic’s dress. Driven out by his elder 
brother, Sugriv had taken a shelter at rishyamuk. Seeing both the brothers, Sugriv was 
scared, thinking them to be agent of his elder brother, Vali. He sent me to them to 
confirm their identity. When I was sure of their identity, I carried both of them on my 


11 The four-fold structure of the social order qirjq'jq is distinctly depicted in valmiki ramayan (5-35-11). 

12 Cubit is unit used to measure length, and is equal to length of forearm from elbow to tip of middle finger (approximately 45 cm). 

13 Hand, leg, eye, ear, eyebrow, nostril, lip, elbow, wrist, knee, loin, chest, thigh, and testicle. 


Page 20 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


shoulders and brought to Sugriv. They learnt about the plight of Sugriv that he was 
dispossessed of his wife and kingdom forcefully by his elder brother Vali. Ram pledged 
to kill Vali and restore his royal possession. Lakshaman described about your abduction 
by devil Ravan, and Sugriv accordingly committed to find you out with the help of his 
monkey army. Sugriv had ornaments in his possession dropped down by you while 
being carried away by Ravan. When you dropped those ornaments before us on 
mountain top, they fell scattered, and we noticed when they stuck the ground with 
ringing sound. Picking them up, I collected them together, and had handed over to 
Sugriv. Finding them relevant for Ram, Sugriv showed those ornaments, and having 
seen them Ram suffered several spells of swoon. We assured him our all help. The 
agony of your separation keeps him awake, concerned and immersed in your thought. In 
your absence, he never enjoyed the pleasure of scenic spots of forests, mountains and 
rivers. When he regained normalcy, with Sugriv he went to Kishkindha. I had also 
accompanied them, while they visited challenging Vali, and having killed him, Ram 
anointed Sugriv the king of monkeys and bears. In your search, Sugriv dispatched 
scores of monkeys in all directions. About one third of the monkeys lead by Angad, son 
of Vali, had been assigned south. I am also a member of that south team. Searching 
dense forests, caves and mountains, rivers and cities we spent our assigned reporting 
period fixed by Sugriv. We were afraid of our life if we went back with no news. We 
decided to fast and end our life. Angad recalled loudly the events following your 
abduction and sacrifice of Jatayu. Sampathi, the elder brother of Jatayu, was around 
there, and he happened to hear Angad mentioning about the death of Jatayu. He 
interfered and told us about your presence in fort of Lanka. Knowing about your location, 
we became excited and soon arrived at the sea shore. We were depressed again to see 
the vastness of sea, but I crossed it successfully and searching you tonight all over in 
the forts and groves have fortunately identified you. I assure you now, that on hearing 
about your location, soon Ram will arrive to eliminate the demons and recover you back. 
You trust me, I am Hanuman, a messenger of Ram sent by Sugriv. My father is mighty 
monkey Kesari who lived on malyavan mountain. He visited once gokarn, and on the 
behest of sages of that sacred pilgrim place, he killed a demon called Shambsadan. I 
am born from the mental resolve of vayu god, and although I am originally a monkey, I 
am capable of assuming any form as the situation demands." 

Sita felt assured about his being a messenger of Ram. Her pale and drooped face shone 
with fresh brightness, while her eyes welled up tears of joy. 

5-36 Souvenir to Sita (47 / 1561) 

Assessing the rise of confidence in Sita, Hauman offered her the signet ring inscribed 
with the name of Ram and mentioned, “Ram gave it to me as a souvenir for you helping 
to win your confidence.” 

Holding the signet ring, Sita was extremely pleased and felt as if she had met her fond 
husband. She praised Hanuman, “You are excellent in your skill, strength and 
intelligence. Crossing one hundred yojan wide sea like a foot print of a cow’s hoof, you 


Page 21 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


entered Lanka treading under your feet all the nooks and corners of this city of devil 
demons. I see you well composed, and fully confident, for you never appear to be 
bothered about Ravan.” 

She further expressed, “Meeting a messenger of Ram, I must confide in you, and 
continue the conversation further. I am delighted to learn about the wellbeing of Ram 
and Lakshaman. I imagine, they must have been getting the news of Kauslya, Sumirta 
and Bharat. Ram is capable of punishing gods, and I wonder why didn’t he dry up sea to 
straighten his way to me. Is he now able to expand his friends’ circle? He is fit for royal 
facilities, has the exile created sense of laziness and despair in him? Does he make 
efforts to get me back?, or else, my destined period of peril does not seem to be over. 
Does he suffer from some affliction? Does he remember to retrieve me? Will Sugriv 
come here with his monkey army to kill demons using their sharp nails and tooth and 
liberate me from them? Would Lakshaman, for my sake, shower his deadly shafts over 
the demons? Shall I be able to witness the elimination of Ravan along with his kith and 
kin? In a dry pond, lotus withers out, is it so that Ram has also withered out in my 
absence? While coming to forest on foot, he did never had any worry; does he, in my 
absence, now hold courage ?” 

Saying thus, Sita became quiet. Hanuman with folded palms submitted to her, “Ram 
does not know about your location. On my return from here, he will come to know about 
you. Using his infallible arrows, he will bridge the wide sea. He will clean sweep this city 
of demons. Mandarchal, Vindhya, Malaya, Meru and other mountains with roots and 
fruits are our favorite resort. I swear on their name, that soon you will be able to have a 
glimpse of Ram’s radiant face. None from the family of Raghu eat meat 14 or take liquor, 
how does Ram will resort to that (5-36-41)? Keeping fast for four fifth of the period, he 
takes some roots and fruits in the fifth period. His mind is constantly immersed 
contemplating about you. Whenever a natural lovely scene is in his sight, he sighs 
deeply and remembers you loudly, “Sita!, O, Sita!.” He is so much concerned about you, 
that it hardly allows him to go into slumber.” 

Hearing Hanuman speaking about Ram, Sita got rid of her sorrow of separation. Soon 
she was caught by the thought of state of grief gripping Ram. She again fell sad, and 
was ensnared to despair, as if a night enjoys partly the moon light, and partly afflicted by 
the shadow of dense dark cloud in sky. 

5-37 Sita’s refusal (68 / 1629) 

Sita spoke to Hanuman, “Your information about the state of grief to Ram is like 
poisonous nectar for me. Nobody can prevail upon time and destiny. Ram, Lakshaman 
and me are the burning examples. I wonder, when shall my husband kill Ravan, destroy 


14 At several places In Arany kand, some commentators have done erroneous translation of the Valmikl's Sanskrit verses 
indicating Ram taking meat. This shlok (5-36-41) is distinct in its declaration that none from the Raghu family, including Ram had 
been ever a meat eater. 


Page 22 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Lanka with demons, and see my face ? My grace life 15 as decreed by Ravan (5-37-7 / 8) 
is limited to end of one year. The current period is the tenth month, leaving only two 
more balance months during which all actions have to performed to liberate me. 
Vibhishan, brother of Ravan, sincerely advised Ravan to return me back to my husband 
Ram, but Ravan didn’t heed to his words. The eldest daughter of Vibhishan is Kala 
and she had reported all such things to me. There is another elderly demon, Avindhya, 
respected by Ravan for his learning, conduct and performances. He also advised Ravan 
to return me back respectfully to Ram otherwise demons would be eliminated, but Ravan 
had ignored his advice also. I know his potential who alone killed fourteen thousand 
demons. He is like sun whose shafts are the radiant rays to destroy demons as water is 
dried up the sun rays.” 

When Sita grew extremely emotional with tears streaming down her cheeks, Hanuman 
spoke to her, “You should have patience. The moment I would inform about you, he 
would depart with large contingent of monkeys and bears to destroy the demons. 
Otherwise, I propose to carry you across sea to him on my back. He is now at prsravan 
giri, and I would take you there today, as fire fetches the oblations to Indr. I am confident 
none of the demons would be able to follow me and I would take you across sea as 
comfortably as I had crossed alone while coming here.” 

Hanuman’s words made Sita excited and she addressed him, “How a small monkey like 
you would be able to carry me across sea ?” Hanuman realized her ignorance about his 
potential, and soon jumping down the tree 16 he showed his fire like brilliant gigantic form. 
Looking at his mountainous rise, she noticed his ruby face, bolt like strong body, and 
sharp nails which gave her an idea of his potential. Hanuman assured her, “I am 
confident of uprooting entire Lanka and carry them along. You should discard your doubt 
about my capability, and come over me; you will be able to remove the grief of Ram and 
Lakshaman. 

She mentioned further, “I know that without such a great potential you wouldn’t have 
been able to cross the sea. I can understand that you will be able to easily carry me but I 
need to consider all pros and cons. First, I am afraid, that due to your wind like speed I 
may suffer a fit causing my fall down in sea and the terrible marine creatures would soon 
feast upon me. Second, the demons on guard would attack when they would notice a 
women being carried away by you. You would be busy in tackling them, and getting 
scared by the terrible fight I would go unconscious and definitely fall down in sea. Third, 
the probability is that demons might snatch me away from you, and I would be killed. 
Fourth, getting terrified by their fierce fighting, under extremely nervous situation, I might 
collapse over your back. If I am dead then the whole purpose of carrying me would be 
defeated. Fifth, even if you succeed in killing the demons, my husband Ram would be 


15 

This suggests Sita stayed for about one year in Lanka. Refer Aranya kand 3-56-24, sarg 56, shlok 24, when Ravan determined 
the period of 12 months for Sita to accept his proposal. 

16 Hanuman was so far conversing with her from the tree itself. 


Page 23 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


deprived of the credit of eliminating the demons. Sixth, if they put me at an unknown 
place again after snatching from you, I would be inaccessible to all the monkeys and 
under that situation Ram and all other monkeys might end their life. Seventh, being a 
chaste woman, I would not touch anybody else other than my husband. My contact with 
Ravan was unavoidable because of his forceful abduction.” 

She finally advised Hanuman, “Let Ram with Sugriv, Lakshaman and monkey army 
come here to fight out Ravan. I am sure Ram would emerge victorious, for none in this 
world is capable to face his terrible arrows.” 

5-38 Sita’s souvenir to Ram (70 / 1699) 

Hanuman was extremely impressed by Sita’s logic of discarding his mission of carrying 
her away on his back. He appreciated, “For a woman, it is really tough to cross one 
hundred yojan wide sea mounting my back. Your another strong point of observing 
conduct of chastity by not touching any person other than husband, is well taken. My 
proposal to take you out from Lanka was based on main intention of expediting your 
meeting with Ram. Other reason of gravity of the task of crossing this wide sea by any 
other person was also in the back of my mind. Rightly you have expressed your lack of 
keenness to accompany me. Under this situation, I pray you to give me some souvenir 
to convince Ram that I had met you.” 

Responding to Hanuman, Sita spoke with tears in her eyes, “I will narrate some incidents 
which only Ram knows. If you narrate them to Ram he would believe your coming and 
conversing with me. Once an incidence occurred in a grove near mandakini river, in the 
north east of chitrakoot mountain. While he was enjoying the water sport, I was sitting 
alone in tapashram enjoying the fragrance of flowers. Suddenly he came wet and sat in 
my lap. Second time when I was alone, one meat eater crow frequently pecked at me 
severely. The crow used to hide after each pecking. I was disturbed by this impudence, 
and when I got up to fasten my loose under garment that a portion of it slipped down. I 
was about to set it right, Ram saw and took humour upon me. First I was a little upset, 
but soon I felt ashamed. He was sitting there, and tired of the crow’s pecking I fell in his 
lap and slept for some pretty period of time. When I was awoke, it was his turn to sleep 
in my lap. When he slept, the crow again appeared and repeated the earlier activities of 
pecking upon me. The crow’s peck at my chest caused blood to drop down over Ram. 
He got up and noticed the injury of my chest. When he gazed around, he saw that crow 
with blood stained claw facing towards me. He became furious and pulled a kush stick 
from the mat. Invoking the mantra of brahmashtra he charged that stick over that crow. 
The stick converted into a burning torch, chased the crow. Afraid of loss of life, the crow 
kept flying in the entire universe. The crow was son of Indr and had arrived from 
heaven. It tried seeking shelter at several places including that of his father Indr and 
other sages. Lastly it fell in the refuge of Ram, and he, out of compassion, pardoned the 
crow by damaging its right eye only.” 

Narrating the incidence of mercy over the crow, Sita advised Hanuman, “Please remind 
Ram that for a petty incidence he had charged brahmashtra over a crow. Now when the 


Page 24 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


demon has abducted me, how does he tolerate such a severe and condemnable act of 
abduction? Why does he delay in charging his infallible shafts against the demon? For 
sure, there is something grievous of the sins I had committed that both the brothers, 
Ram and Lakshaman have forgotten me.” 

Hearing the sorrowful words of Sita, Hanuman interfered to console her, “Neither Ram 
nor Lakshaman have forgotten you. They are constantly immersed in your memory. If 
you wish, kindly convey some message for them. Sita spoke to Hanuman, “Kindly offer 
my respectful salutation to Ram. Convey my good wishes to Lakshaman for his well 
being and advise him to make all preparations to remove my grief. You are my souvenir 
to convince Ram of meeting me.” 

Sita, subsequently, opened a knotted cloth and took out the crest jewel. Handing over to 
Hanuman she asked him to pass on that souvenir to Ram. Hanuman gladly took the 
crest jewel, and when he found that jewel falling short 17 to fit over his arm, he put that 
one, over one of his fingers. He was so excited that after taking that souvenir Jewel, he 
felt as if he was standing in front of Ram and Lakshaman. Giving round of Sita with full 
reverence, he saluted her, and stood to seek her permission. 

5-39 Sita’s anxiety (54 / 1753) 

Sita mentioned, “Ram is familiar with the crest jewel which I gave you. Seeing this he 
would remember simultaneously my mother, me and king Dasarath.” She asked 
Hanuman to plan future course of action, and reminded him, “You have complete idea of 
Lanka, and therefore, greater responsibility lies over your shoulders. Your special effort 
would help remove my agony." 

When, in a bid to depart, Hanuman offered his humble respect in her feet she spoke in a 
choked voice, “Intimate both the brothers about my state of affairs here. Convey my 
greetings to monkey king Sugriv and other elder monkeys. Kindly advise Ram to end my 
agony soon if he wants to see me alive.” 

Hanuman keeping his respectful folded palms over his head, responded positively and 
assured her, “Soon Ram will arrive here with scores of monkeys and bears. None from 
the humans, gods and demons are capable to face Ram in the battle field. For your 
sake he would even win sun, Indr, and death god Yam. He would be victorious, there is 
no doubt about it." 

Hearing his sweet and confident words, Sita further spoke, “If it is proper, hiding safely, 
stay one more day here which would extend further my relaxation period. For long I had 
been facing severe agony, and when you depart my sorrow would be compounded. 
Time and again I am concerned about the crossing of this vast sea by monkeys and both 
the brothers. Only three: garud , you and vayu god are capable of crossing this sea. The 
most vital unsolved puzzle is the crossing of sea. Do you see any solution? Kindly 


17 Although he was in a tiny form, the crest jewel was small for his arms. 


Page 25 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


enlighten me, otherwise I am not able to overcome my concern about this ticklish 
question.” 

Hanuman assured her, “The excellent ones are never sent as a messenger, rather 
ordinary ones are chosen for such assignment. The contingent of monkeys under Sugriv 
have got innumerable valorous ones who can easily cross the sea. I am among the 
ordinary ones, and if I can cross this sea, where is the question of doubt about others. 
For Ram and Lakshaman, I assure you that I would take them across sea over my 
shoulders. They are powerful like fire and wind, and once in Lanka they would soon 
eliminate the demons. You should discard your concern and agony, and I assure you 
that their movement is delayed only upto the period I go back and tell them about your 
location.” 

5-40 Hanuman moved northward (25 / 1778) 

Sita spoke to Hanuman, “I am extremely glad to see you here. Please arrange my 
earliest visit to Ram. Remind him about his powerful shaft, which took one eye of the 
crow. He should recall another incident when the mark over my forehead was erased, 
and he put immediately a fresh one. How does he afford to languish me here in Lanka. I 
had carefully protected the crest jewel which used to give me solace here as if I was in 
your association. Now I send that to you to help you recollect about me. Ravan is cruel 
as well as ill intended, and I would no longer survive if your arrival is delayed.” 

Hearing her sorrowful words, Hanuman spoke to her, “You need not worry now. The 
moment I met you, I take this as end of your agony. Both the brothers would very soon 
raze Lanka to dust.” 

When Hanuman enquired about some other souvenir, Sita assured him, “This is the best 
souvenir I handed over to you. Taking a look at this crest jewel, Ram would be greatly 
impressed.” 

Hanuman was about to take a leap for departure, that Sita again reminded him to 
accelerate the arrival of Ram and Lakshaman to Lanka. “I wish you a happy journey” , 
mentioned Sita to Hanuman. 

Hearing the good wishes of Sita, Hanuman happily moved in the northern direction. 

5-41 Pramada van ( ashok vatika) destroyed (21 / 1799) 

Before leaving Lanka, he intended to familiarize himself with the strategic strength of 
Ravan. Out of four 18 tactical initiatives, Hanuman preferred to adopt the fourth one. 
Pramada van was the inner most beautiful grove inside ahsok vatika, and he decided to 
damage the pramada van. He uprooted the trees, and stirred badly the water bodies. 
The chirping and charming birds deserted the grove in panic. Soon the most beautiful 


18 Sam, dan, bhed and dand (spr if? ) praise, gift, dissension, and penalty. 


Page 26 of 44 




Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


grove was ransacked beyond recognition. Having done that, he stood on the entry gate 
of the grove. 

5-42 Hanuman killed kinkar demons (44 / 1843) 

Entire Lanka could hear the sound of breaking and falling of trees. The fleeing animals 
and birds indicated prevalence of abnormal situation in Lanka. The residents of the city 
also experienced incidence of bad omen. The chaotic scene caused waking up of 
dreaded demonesses on guard sleeping inside pramada. They noticed the felled trees, 
and also they spotted Hanuman at the gate. At that time, with a view to scare them, 
Hanuman had assumed a huge mountainous form with terrifying features. 

The demonesses rushed to Sita and enquired from her whether she knew about that 
monkey at the gate. Sita denied, “You demons are champion in assuming any form. It is 
all your creation, I am not aware who is he." 

Soon they rushed to Ravan and informed about complete ransacking of pramada by a 
monkey. They spoke to him, “Sita doesn’t divulge any information about the monkey. He 
has damaged all the trees except the one under which Sita stayed.” 

Ravan became extremely angry so much so that his red eyes dropped tears as if two 
burning lamps dropped oil. He immediately dispatched selected contingent of eighty 
thousand kinkar demons. Coming to pramada they surrounded Hanuman from all sides. 
Hanuman produced terrifying roar announcing, “Hail to Ram, Lakshaman and Sugriv.” 
The reverberations of his roar were heard all over Lanka. His sound was so terrible that 
flying birds dropped unconscious over ground. 

Looking at the demons, he proudly mentioned, “I am an humble servant of Ram ( 

) ■ My name is Hanuman and I am son of vayu. When I 

would attack with trees and rocks, thousands of Ravan wouldn’t be able to face me. I am 
bent upon to destroy Lanka, and on completion of my mission, I would depart offering 
my salutation to Sita.” 

Demons, getting his introduction, charged from all sides their deadly weapons over him. 
Hanuman picked up an iron baton lying over ground near the gate he was standing. 
Using the iron baton he killed, one by one, all the demons. 

A few of the survivors rushed back to Ravan, and informed him about killing of all the 
demons. Ravan soon dispatched the mighty warrior, Jambumali, son of Prahasta. 

5-43 Ashok van chaityaprasad (temple) destroyed (25 /1868) 

After destroying the pramada, he thought to destroy the demons’ temple also. Leaping 
high, he went up the temple and began hammering out the structures apart. The terrible 
sound of breaking the temple caused swoons to birds and animals. He frequently hailed 
glory to Ram, Lakshaman, and Sugriv. At the same time he repeated his introduction, “I 
am an humble servant of Ram ( sratsi ) 5-43-09. My name is 


Page 27 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Hanuman and I am son of vayu. When I would attack with trees and rocks, thousands of 
Ravan wouldn’t be able to face me. I am bent upon to destroy Lanka, and on completion 
of my mission, I would depart offering my salutation to Sita.” 

Hearing the terrible sound, the demons on guard laid a siege of Hanuman. He magnified 
himself to a formidable proportion. Picking up a golden pillar, he rotated that pillar swiftly 
causing break out of fire. The temple structure was soon burnt to ashes. Using the same 
pillar he killed the demons, and loudly announced, “Sugriv had dispatched thousands of 
monkeys to all directions. They have strength of elephants; some of ten, some of 
hundred, while some of thousand elephants. Soon Sugriv would arrive in Lanka with his 
large army of monkeys. As a consequence of enmity with Ram, Lanka would be 
destroyed, and all demons including Ravan would be eliminated." 

5-44 Jambumali killed (20 / 1888) 

Jambumali was a great warrior. He was in red dress having red garland around his neck. 
Riding a chariot pulled by asses he arrived near the pramada’s gate. Holding his rainbow 
like bow, he pulled the string producing terrible sound. He found Hanuman over the gate, 
and soon he charged several arrows injuring his various organs; ardhachandr over face, 
karni over forehead, and ten narach over his arms. The blood coming out from several 
places of Hanuman’s body further enhanced the beauty of his golden complexion. 

Enraged Hanuman hurled several trees, and rock masses over Jambumali, but the 
demon cut them swiftly into pieces. Shooting more number of sharp shafts, the demon 
caused further injuries to Hanuman. Seized with immense anger, Hanuman hurled 
heavily the iron baton over Jambumali which not only brought mortal end of the demon 
himself but crushed beyond recognition his arrows, bow, chariot, and horses. 

5-45 Killing of seven sons of the Ravan’s secretary (17 / 1905) 

Hearing the end of Jambumali, Ravan sent seven mighty sons of his secretary. 
Accompanied by large contingent of demons they arrived mounting horse pulled huge 
chariots. No sooner they arrived than they commenced showering deadly shafts over 
Hanuman. The mountainous form of Hanuman was covered with shafts as if a mountain 
had a hazy appearance under the heavy downpour. Moving freely, Hanuman saved 
himself. Finally, he stormed over the demons, and killed them using his slaps, clenched 
fists, nails and teeth. Soon the ground was strewn with dead bodies of demons, their 
weapons, and wrecked chariots. 

5-46 Five army heads killed (41 / 1946) 

The news of further devastation by Hanuman made Ravan nervous, but apparently he 
maintained his posture and commanded five army heads: Virupaksh, Yupaksh, Durdhar, 
Praghas, and Bhaskarn to tackle the monkey firmly. He spoke to them, “In the past I 
have seen several mighty monkeys who were Vali, Sugriv, Neel, Dwivid, and mighty 
bear chief Jambvan. Today’s monkey seems to be not only a simple monkey but 
creation of gods against us. I guess Indr could have attained this monkey by dint of his 


Page 28 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


severe penance. Gods have been defeated by us several times, and this monkey 
appears to be someone sent by them to avenge their defeat. You need to be alert 
because outcome in a battle field always remains uncertain. I wish you hold this monkey 
alive and bring it to me. You are free to take your own decision according to the 
prevailing situation during your encounter.” 

When those five warriors arrived near pramada they found Hanuman at the gate. At the 
very first sight they were impressed by Hanuman’s overall personality. Durdhar 
commenced the combat by charging five arrows over his head, and this caused 
Hanuman to leap with a larger body in sky. Durdhar continued showering arrows over 
him. Hanuman gravitated his huge body and jumping over the chariot of Durdhar 
smashed all the eight horses, broke the axle. In this operation Durdhar couldn’t survive 
and he fell crushed over ground. 

Virupaksh and Yupaksh leaped up in sky to face the huge monkey, Hanuman. They 
pounded with their pestle over his chest. Hanuman picked up a large sal tree and 
bounced on both the demons leading to their immediate death. 

Praghas and Bhaskarn together pounced over Hanuman with their trident and sharp 
pestle. Injured severely by their weapons, oozing blood made him reddish like the rising 
sun. Wrathful Hanuman picked up a hillock full of trees, animals and snakes and dashed 
that over both the demons. Getting crushed, they also died instantly. 

When all the five heads of army were killed, Hanuman tackled the left over army firmly. 
Using their chariot, and elephants he killed all of them. The ground was strewn with dead 
bodies, and there was hardly any space left for movement. Hanuman again came back 
to the gate demonstrating his readiness to face further attack. 

5-47 Akshkumar ( ) killed (38 / 1984) 

When Ravan heard about the death of five army heads, he couldn’t utter a word and 
gazed at his son, Akshkumar. He rose up from his seat, and excitedly left for the 
pramada. He mounted his invincible chariot which he had attained by severe penance. 
Being pulled by eight horses, it shone like sun. Inside of the chariot was furnished with 
varieties of deadly weapons. Accompanied by huge army, he arrived where Hanuman 
was sitting over the pramada gate. 

Akshkumar had a glance over him and expanded his body to a large size. He took out 
deadly arrows and coming close to Hanuman commenced the combat without any loss 
of time. Both were engaged in such a fierce fighting that caused great havoc in the 
universe. Sun became still with reduced radiance, vayu (wind) was stopped, mountains 
trembled, sky was full of terrible sound, and sea was swept by storm. When Akshkumar 
hit Hanuman’s head by three arrows, stream of blood made Hanuman like anshumali 
sun. He became angry and enlarged his form to a mountainous proportion. Akshkumar 
continued showering arrows as if rains poured over a mountain. Akshkumar’s ferocious 
attack, made Hanuman more excited, and he produced a terrible sound. 


Page 29 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Hanuman appreciated the valour and warfare skill of the demon, Akshkumar who looked 
like a child and rising sun. Looking to his tender age, Hanuman was full of compassion 
and didn’t like to kill him. When Akshakumar maintained terrible shooting but Hanuman 
escaped all his shafts by passing through the gap between two adjacent 19 arrows. 
Hanuman’s movement was set at astonishingly high speed like that of stormy wind. In 
order to check the rising spirit of Akshkumar, Hanuman killed the eight horses of the 
chariot by his slaps only. When he manually broke the chariot, Akshkumar jumped in sky 
with his sword and bow. The demon continued chasing Hanuman in sky with shower of 
arrows. Hanuman got hold of both his legs, and rotating him around several times by 
legs, he hurled the demon down over ground. Akshkumar fell dead with all his organs 
scattered around. Gods, sages, gandharv and other celestial beings who had gathered 
in sky, took an awful glance at Hanuman. 

5-48 Indrajeet seized Hanuman (61 / 2045) 

The news of loss of Akshkumar was horribly shocking to the demon king Ravan. He 
addressed his valorous son Indrajeet, “This monkey has rare potential. He killed the 
contingent of deadly kinkar demons, seven mighty sons of the secretary, five top army 
heads, and your lovely brother Akshkumar. You are well versed in all sorts of warfare, 
and gods have accepted your superiority. Besides rare physical potential, you have also 
earned several invincible shafts and weapons from Brahma. Like me, you are equally 
competent over the earth in use of all sorts of weapons. There is no match of your valour 
in the battle field. I wish, you go alone, and ensure success in our favour.” 

Before leaving, Indrajeet gave respectful round to Ravan. Paised by other elite demons 
in the royal court, he set out mounting a brilliant chariot pulled by four lions. His chariot 
had a flag marked with the image of Indr. Seeing him coming close, Hanuman 
immensely enlarged his body. 

Indrajeet charged all sorts of arrows over him. Hanuman escaped the attack due to his 
astonishing high wind speed. He could manage to pass through the gap of the two 
adjacent arrows. His whirling speed puzzled Indrajeet, for he failed to strike him with his 
surest of arrows. Hanuman also appreciated the valour of Indrajeet, since he couldn’t 
find chance to hold him in his grip. 

Lastly, Indrajeet discarded his idea of killing him, and thought of catching him in fetters. 
With this intention when he charged brahmashtr, Hanuman fell in fetters of the divine 
weapon. Hanuman had a boon from Brahma to be freed in a moment from the influence 
of all divine weapons including the ultimate one brahmashtr. 

Demons found Hanuman lying ensnared over ground, and they immediately seized him 
with stronger ropes. When Indrajeet took a glance at Hanuman, he found him freed from 


Being son of vayu god, Hanuman was capable of transforming instantly as he wished. He therefore, although whirling around in a 
gigantic form could be able to pass through the small space between two adjacent arrows. ( SkkA ) 5- 47— 

23. 


Page 30 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


brahmashtr, and he was seized only with the ropes. This caused great surprise to 
Indrajeet, and he could realize that Hanuman had voluntarily preferred to be seized by 
ropes, otherwise the one who could overcome the divine fetters could have easily 
discarded the earthly fetters also. 

Bound in ropes, Hanuman was taken to Ravan. On way, he heard demons pronouncing 
to kill him or eat him alive. He gave them opportunity to play with him, and several times 
he was physically teased by the naughty demons. 

When he was produced in the royal court, he had a view of splendorous possession of 
the demon king. He was impressed by the physical personality of Ravan holding the 
royal court. Having a look at the monkey, Ravan commanded to his secretaries, “Find 
out the details about this monkey, and his intention of visiting Lanka.” Hanuman 
responded forthwith, “I am a messenger of monkey king Sugriv.” 

5-49 Pondering Hanuman (20 / 2065) 

When Hanuman saw Ravan mounted over royal throne he was surprised with his 
magnificent personality. Hanuman continued watching carefully, “Ravan was dark in 
complexion and several precious silk cloths had enhanced his physique. His ten heads 
(5-49-6) appeared like deadly snakes magnifying the image of mandrachala. The crown 
of his heads, and jewels over several organs appeared appropriately placed as if they 
were produced by mental resolve. All the jewels had carving of precious gems. Varieties 
of fragrant sandal pastes were found applied at several spots of his huge body. His 
throne was equally impressive which further enhanced his personality.” 

Four well qualified ministers: Durdhar, Prahast, Mahaparshv, and Nikumbh, were seated 
in the first row of the royal court close to Ravan. Although Ravan was involved in 
immoral acts, Hanuman was greatly impressed by him. He pondered for a while, “If this 
demon king would have adhered to righteousness, he would have proved the greatest 
among the gods including Indr. It is most surprising as well as puzzling that he has all 
the physical qualities of a mighty king.” 

5-50 Prahast’s enquiry (19 / 2084) 

Seeing grey eyed Hanuman Ravan thought, “Once I had ridiculed Nandi at Kailas. It 
seems, to teach me lesson he had assumed this form.” Reflecting thus, he advised 
Prahast to enquire, “Who is he? Why did he come to Lanka?” 

On behest of Ravan, Prahast enquired from Hanuman, “Have you been sent by either of 
Indr, Varun, Kuber, Yam or Vishnu? What is the purpose of your visit to Lanka?” 

Hanuman discarded their guess and mentioned, “I am agent of none of the gods. I 
wanted to see Ravan, and with this intention I destroyed pramada van. When the 
demons attacked over me, I had to save myself, and accordingly they have been killed. I 
have a boon of Brahma that no weapon or bond would affect me. Although currently I 


Page 31 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


am freed from brahma’s bond, I came here in simple fetters. I am a messenger of Ram, 
and have come here with his assignment." 

5-51 Recitation of Ram’s glory (45 / 2129) 

Hanuman continued addressing Ravan, “Sugriv is your cousin brother (5-51-2), and he 
had sent me here. I wish you hear his message to you. Recently there has been a king 
known as Dasarath who is famous as Indr. His eldest and endearing son, Ram has 
taken a resort in forest of Dandak in honor of his father’s command. Ram stayed in 
forest with his brother Lakshaman, and wife Sita. Somehow Sita, the daughter of Janak, 
is missing from Janasthan. Searching Sita, Ram with his brother Lakshaman, met Sugriv 
at rishyamuk. Sugriv assured him to find out Sita, and he gave words to Sugriv to 
restore his lost kingdom. Ram killed Vali using a single shaft, and made Sugriv 
sovereign king of monkeys. Truthful Sugriv had dispatched monkeys in all quarters to 
find out Sita. They are mighty as well as capable like garud and vayu. I am one of them, 
and my name is Hanuman. I am a mental son of vayu god. Crossing hundred yojan sea, 
I came to Lanka and have located Sita here.” 

He further exhorted Ravan, “You have earned the splendorous kingdom and royal 
possession by dint of your severe penance. It is righteousness of your penance that 
gave you huge potential. It is immoral and unrighteous to detain somebody’s wife. Such 
act is sinful and leads to complete destruction of the doer. There is nobody in this 
universe who could face the arrows of Ram and Lakshaman. I have already met Sita, 
and I advise you to return her to Ram. None can digest poisonous food, similarly you 
can’t detain Sita with you. Your penance has given you immortality against gods and 
demons, but Sugriv is monkey and Ram is a human being. You can’t escape their wrath 
alive. Sita is not a simple woman, she would fetch end of Lanka. Although I am alone 
capable of destroying entire Lanka but I don’t have the permission of Ram to do that. I 
advise you to ponder carefully over three evnets: destruction of devil demons in 
Janasthan, end of Vali, and coronation of Sugriv, and then look for your well being.” 

Hanuman warned Ravan, “I am a monkey, servant of Ram, and his messenger. (5-51- 
38) jfRTOT i Listen to my truthful declaration. Even four headed Brahma, three 

eyed Rudr, and gods’ chief Indr wouldn’t be able to provide you protection against Ram.” 

Ravan didn’t like Hanuman’s advice, and wrathfully ordered the attendants to kill him 
immediately. 

5-52 Vibhishan interfered (28 / 2157) 

Ravan was extremely angry, and Vibhishan heard his command to kill the messenger of 
Sugriv and Ram. He thought, “it is unbecoming of a king to kill a messenger.” Although 
Ravan was angry and to speak before him was a tough task, Vibhishan submitted 
politely, “I beg pardon, and allow me to advise. Kindly discard your anger, and consider 
the propriety of your order. Excellent among kings never kills some one’s messenger. 


Page 32 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


You are learned in all Vedas, scriptures and statecraft. Be pleased and review your 
order so that you don’t earn bad name on this account.” 

Vibhishan’s request didn’t impress Ravan, and he mentioned, “This monkey has 
destroyed pramada, and killed several demons. He is unpardonable.” 

Vibhishan continued his submission, “You have won gods and there is none to oppose 
you. You know about dos and don’ts of a successful and renowned king. Scriptures 
enjoin some physical punishment, but not the capital punishment to a messenger. This 
monkey has definitely committed condemnable acts, and he could be punished by 
inflicting loss of some of the organs, tonsuring, grievous mark on his body etc. but not 
the death. A messenger always talks in favour of his master. Capital punishment should 
be given to his master who had sent him here, but not to him. I would advise to send 
select contingent of army and arrest those two humans who have caused him to be 
here.” 

Ravan, reflecting a little over Vibhishan’s advice, agreed to his points of view for sparing 
the life of the messenger. 

5-53 Tail set on fire (44 / 2201) 

Consenting to Vibhishan’s advice, Ravan decreed, “Monkeys love their tail, therefore, let 
the tail of this monkey be burnt. He must be moved around the city with his burning tail. 
When he will go back, his relatives, and friends would see him in pitiable condition of 
burnt tail. ” 

Demons taking hold of Hanuman wrapped old cloths around the tail. To take pleasure, 
Hanuman enlarged his body again, and the demons having wrapped cloths over his long 
extended tail, poured oil and set it on fire. Hanuman used his burning tail to beat 
severely several demons. He was again seized and put in fetters. Hanuman thought, 
“Although I can break it, I must remain in fetters, because I haven’t properly observed 
the strategic security of this city at night. It is good that during day time they would take 
me around, and I would carefully observe the city’s fortification." 

Keeping him chained, demons took him around the entire city. After sometime, 
Hanuman, in fetters, took a flight and rose to the terrace of a building. When he reduced 
his size, fetters automatically went loose, and he was free from any fetters. 

In the meanwhile, demonnesses informed Sita about the plight of Hanuman whose tail 
was set ablaze. Sita offered her sincere prayer to fire god, “If I have protected my 
chastity, kindly get cooler with Hanuman.” In varieties of ways she prayed fire god to be 
kind to Hanuman. Her prayer was favourably answered by the fire god as well as vayu 
god. Wind (vayu) blew at a much cooler temperature causing comfort to Hanuman as if 
he had a chunk of frozen ice over the burning end of tail. Hanuman also realized the 
miracle and felt no burning pain. 


Page 33 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Hanuman saw an iron baton lying nearby, he picked up the baton and using that he 
again killed scores of demons on guard of the city. 


5-54 Burning Lanka (51 / 2252) 

Hanuman felt satisfied with his achievements in Lanka, “I have already met Sita. 
Subsequently, having badly destroyed the pramada grove, I also killed scores of mighty 
and renowned warriors. Now let me destroy the forts of Lanka.” 

He leapt from one building to another observing the city’s layout of structures and 
groves. His movement looked like a drifting dark cloud with frequent flashes of 
lightening. During this process he burnt the mansions of Prahast, Mahaparshav, 
Vajrdanshtr, Shuk, Saran, Indrajeet, Jambumali, Sumali, Rashmiketu, Suryashatru, 
Hrushvakarn, Danshtr, Romash, Ranonmatth, Matth, Dhavjgreev, Vidyujjihan, 
Hastimukh, Karal, Vishal, Shonitaksh, Kumbhakarn, Makraksh, Narantak, Kumbh, 
Nikumbh, Ygyshatru, and Brahmshatru. 

After sparing the house of Vibhishan, he jumped to the largest of the forts belonging to 
Ravan. He dropped the burning fire over there, and caused complete burning of all the 
mansions lying over the premises of the demon king. The burning of the forts were 
further aggravated by sudden incidence of stormy wind. Several demonnesses coming 
out of the burning houses were burnt with their children. Hanuman also leapt to the 
peaks of mountains and set ablaze the forest over the mountains. 

The burning temperature was so high that gold, coral pieces, and other gems were seen 
in molten state and flowed freely. Besides scores of chariots, horses, and elephants 
were burnt to ashes. The demons gathered in panic expressed their feelings, “The 
monkey appears to be one of the mighty gods either Indr , or Varun, or Yam, or Kuber , or 
sun, or moon, or Agni, or Vayu. Angry four-faced Brahma himself appears to have 
caused this havoc. Vishnu who is beyond description, inaccessible in meditation, and 
rare in manifestation, would have invoked his maya shakti (associate) to wreak this 
havoc over Lanka. The city has burnt as if Shiv destroyed the city of Tripur.” Panicked 
with the colossal loss of wealth, animals, and the lives of dear and near ones, the city of 
Lanka reverberated with wailing cry of demons. 

The flames of burning Lanka were so high that it gave an impression as if entire earth 
was set ablaze. Gods and other celestial beings gathered in sky recited the glory of 
Hanuman for performing such a miraculous feat. Having attained his goal, Hanuman 
recited repeatedly the glory of Ram, and he extinguished his burning tail by immersing it 
in sea. 

5-55 Hanuman’s anxiety (35 / 2287) 

Having put out the tail’s fire in sea, he came out and had a look of Lanka burnt to ashes. 
Suddenly he was haunted by an imaginary fear, “Entire city is destroyed beyond 


Page 34 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


recognition. Carelessly I caused the end of Sita also, she must not have escaped from 
the razing fire. My this act will cause a great calamity to Ram. Hearing end of Sita, both 
the brothers would end their life. Sugriv would also not survive such a shock. Two 
brothers, Bharat and Shatrughn will hardly live longer. My childish act of destroying 
Lanka would cause annihilation of the Ikshavaku house. I am a sinner, and I must end 
my life here itself.” 

While he suffered from the anxiety, he got another thought, “Fire god was kind enough 
on me that he saved my tail from any burn injury. I don’t think he wouldn’t have saved 
Sita from burning. I know that Sita’s penance of chastity, is enough to cause elimination 
of fire itself rather than she would suffer any affliction from the blazing fire.” 

In the meanwhile he heard the celestial beings, “Hail to Hanuman! He razed entire 
Lanka to ashes but surprisingly, Sita remained untouched.” Hanuman became happy 
that Sita is safe and I am free from any impending sin.” 

5-56 Returning Hanuman (51 / 2338) 

Before leaving, Hanuman with folded hands again visited Sita and offered his respectful 
salutation. Sita asked him to stay 20 for one more day hiding to some unknown place, and 
she further mentioned, “So far I have suffered a lot and I got some solace after meeting 
you. Once you leave, I would again face similar horrible situation which I had witnessed 
earlier. Although I am highly impressed by your performances but I still carry the 
apprehension about crossing of sea by Sugriv, his army, and two brothers Ram and 
Lakshaman.” Hanuman assured her about the potential of Sugriv, his army, and Ram 
and Lakshaman (ref. sarg 39 of Sundarkand, shlok 26 through 47). 

Saluting Sita again with full respect, he left for his return journey of crossing back sea. 
To gain enough momentum, he climbed up the arisht mountain on the southern shore of 
sea. His rapid movement preparatory to launching on leap, caused terrible disturbance 
to the mountain and it quaked under his high foot pressure. This caused rocks flying into 
splinters, serpents raising their hoods, lions roaring, wild animals running in panic, and 
celestial residents quitting their shelters. Thirty yojan high and ten yojan wide arisht 
mountain soon sank to the level ground. 

5-57 Union of Hanuman with Angad and Jambavan (53 / 2391) 

While flying back across sea, Hanuman looked like a winged mountain. In the backdrop 
of vastness of sea, sky also appeared like a vast inverted sea where celestial beings and 
stars looked quite different: moon light like water, wind like ripples, nag, ykash, and 
gandharv like lotus, moon like lily, sun like watermelon, pushya and shravana asterism 
like ducks, swati asterism like swan, clouds like grass weeds, punarvasu asterism like 
large fish, mars like crocodile, and airavat elephant like hillock. Hanuman moved like 


20 From shlok 3 through 21 of this sarg 56 are almost verbatim repetition of shlok 20, and shlok 26 through 47 of sarg 39 of sundar 
kand itself. 


Page 35 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


garud in sky, and sometimes he was under cloud, and soon emerged like moon. 
Proceeding thus he touched mainak mountain, and like an arrow in motion he continued 
his flight further. Coming close to mahendra mountain on northern shore, he produced 
sound of a thundering cloud. 

Passionately, waiting monkeys heard his thunder like roar, and with utmost excitement 
they commenced leaping from one tree to another. Jambvan was glad to see returning 
Hanuman, and he mentioned loudly, “Roaring Hanuman, is an auspicious sign for us. He 
must have attained his goal.” When Hanuman landed at mahendr, he found himself 
surrounded by excited monkeys. They offered him delicious fruits in gift. They were so 
much pleased that some were busy in producing welcome sound, while others brought 
branches of trees for his sitting. 

Hanuman offered his respectful salutation to Jambvan and Angad who in return 
demonstrated their humble respect for him. Hanuman broke the good news, “I have met 
venerable woman Sita.” Subsequently, Hanuman holding Angad’s hands, moved to the 
lovely arena of mahendr mountain. He again mentioned, “Sita stays in ashok van of 
Lanka. She has become lean and thin. Her hair lock has turned into a single mat. She is 
excited to see Ram.” Hearing him speaking thus elated the monkeys so much so that 
they again produced pleasant sounds. They danced raising their tail, and in a bid to 
express their gratitude, they created a race like scene to go and touch Hanuman. 

Angad was anxious to hear the details of his travelogue. He addressed the surrounding 
monkeys, “Hanuman is the most valorous among us. He has demonstrated his rare 
capability of performing something impossible. He crossed the sea twice. His valour, 
strength and skill is beyond any description. With his grace now we shall happily meet 
Ram holding the good news of locating Sita. Hanuman has a rare devotion to Ram, and 
with his good news Ram will, for sure, discard his sorrowful state.” 

5-58 Hanuman’s Lanka’s travelogue (169 / 2560) 

Monkeys at Mahendrgiri were glad to see Hanuman among them. When all the monkeys 
took their seat, Jambvan made queries to Hanuman, “How did you find out her? How is 
she? How does Ravan behave with her? What did she speak to you? While being in 
Kishkindha, how should we present this mission of locating her? What shall be our future 
course of action?” 

Responding to Jambvan, Hanuman first offered his mental salutation to Sita, and then 
began narrating the details of his travel to Lanka. Covering the journey over sea he 
mentioned, “When I leapt high over sea from Mahendragiri , I had single objective of 
crossing the sea at the earliest. While cruising ahead, I saw a mountain rising to me, 
whom I took as an obstacle on my way. Making several strikes with my tail, I made 
several fragments of the rocks of the mountain. Soon I heard a voice, “Son, take me as 
your uncle. I am Mainak, and I am greatly obliged to your father Vayu. Earlier, 
mountains had wings, and hearing complain from the people of their willfulness, Indr cut 
their wings off. I being pushed down in sea by your father Vayu, have saved my wings. I 


Page 36 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


felt it obligatory to assist you in the mission of Ram." He wished me all success, and I 
proceeded further. Continuing for quite some time on my way, I met Sursa, mother of 
snakes. She stood on my way and spoke, “Gods have assigned you as my food.” I told 
her the story of Ram whose wife Sita was stolen by Ravan. After finding her location, I 
would inform Ram about her, and thereafter I will be present at your service. I was about 
ten yojan wide when I met her, and I enlarged it further by one and halftimes. She also 
enlarged the opening of her mouth in proportion to my expanding body. Suddenly, I 
assumed a thumb size, and entering her mouth, swiftly came out. She was glad to see 
my cleverness, and she wished success in my mission. Thereafter, I continued my 
journey like flying garud, but soon I felt a break in my speed. I could not find any reason, 
but someone had caught hold of my shadow. When I looked down, I found a demoness 
with large gaping mouth. I accordingly enlarged my body but she opened her mouth 
further wide. Soon I became very small, and cutting off her chest I flew in the sky. When 
I saw down below, she had fallen dead in sea. I heard siddha speaking, “Hanuman had 
killed the demoness Simhika." 

Hanuman continued his journey details what had happened when he entered inside 
Lanka, “I landed on the southern sea shore, and entered inside Lanka after sunset. 
Initially nobody noticed my entry, but soon a dark complexioned dreadful woman 
obstructed my way and tried to kill me. To save my life, I charged a single pound over 
her, with my left fist. When she fell on ground, she disclosed that she was Lanka’s city 
deity. She allowed me to enter into Lanka mentioning, “My defeat indicates that you will 
be able to win over all the demons.” Whole night I kept wandering from one place to 
another to find out Sita. I searched all nooks and corners of the inner palace of Ravan. 
When she was not seen any where I became sad. Soon I saw a beautiful grove and 
scaling over its ramparts, I entered inside the grove. The grove was full of ashok trees. 
Climbing the tallest tree, I could see Sita sitting under one of them. I found her immersed 
in sorrow with dust collected over her head. Her hair had turned into a single lock. 
Although she looked impressive young, but she had become weak due to keeping fast, 
and long spell of grief. Dreadful demonesses were on her guard, and she appeared like 
a deer surrounded by lions.” 

Talking about Ravan’s behavior, Hanuman mentioned, “Late night, I heard the sweet 
notes of anklets and other jewels. Ten headed Ravan, surrounded by his wives, arrived 
in ashok grove. In my shrunken form, I hid behind the leaves over the tree. Seeing him 
coming, Sita trembled with fear and squeezed her body while sitting under the tree. 
Coming close, ten-headed Ravan fell over Sita’s feet. Offering himself as her servant, he 
mildly persuaded her to accept him. When he felt neglected by her, he threatened to 
drink her blood after two months. Sita confidently scolded him, “Being a grand-daughter 
of Ikshavaku house, I am wife of righteous Ram. I wonder, in speaking thus about me, 
why didn’t you lose your tongue. O thief! When my husband was not present, you 
hijacked me to Lanka. You can never face him, and you don’t deserve to be his servant 
either, for he is adherent to truth, valorous and invincible.” Hearing Sita’s harsh words 
Ravan became angry, and he rushed towards Sita with his clenched fist to kill her. Royal 
demonesses cried in alarm, and Mandodari forbade him in doing so. Persuading him 


Page 37 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


further, they took him back to the palace. When Ravan left, the demonesses on guard 
threatened her with dire consequences. When she ignored their initiatives, they went to 
report Ravan about her firm resolve. Coming back, they again tried to torture her, and 
ultimately tired of their effort they fell asleep. Getting alone Sita wailed with grief for her 
husband. In the meanwhile, Trijata, a demoness among them, rose and spoke to them, 
“You all should eat yourself and not Sita. I have seen in dream auspicious happenings in 
favour of Sita, and painful end of the demons of Lanka. Only Sita would be able to 
protect us against the anger of Ram. We should seek pardon of her, and she is kind 
enough to pardon us by offering a single salutation.” When Sita heard about the dream, 
she assured them full protection from her side if it came to be true." 

Describing his efforts to converse with Sita, Hanuman narrated, “I was extremely 
anxious to talk to her. In order to win her confidence, I initiated with the recitation of the 
glory of the Ikshavaku dynasty. Hearing my words, with tears in her eyes, she spoke to 
me, “O, excellent among monkeys! Who are you, and how did you come here? Who had 
sent you, and how do you know Ram?” In response to her queries, I mentioned that I am 
Hanuman, and I have come here as commanded by monkey king Sugriv. I am a 
messenger of Ram, and I have got this signet ring as Ram’s souvenir to you. O 
Venerable one! Tell me, what can I do for you? If you permit, I could carry you to Ram 
and Lakshaman. Declining my proposal, she preferred Ram himself to arrive, and 
eliminate Ravan before taking her out from Lanka.” 

Hanuman further narrated as to how he got the souvenir from her for Ram, “Bending low 
I offered my salutation to her, and requested for some souvenir to convince Ram that I 
had seen Sita. She gave me her crest jewel and mentioned, “Seeing this, Ram would 
extend regard to you.” Offering my respectful salutation to her, I made a clockwise round 
of her. She asked me to convey her pitiable condition to Ram, and arrange arrival of 
Ram, Lakshaman and Sugriv to Lanka within two months otherwise after that she won’t 
found alive.” 

Hanuman continued further, “Hearing Sita’s words, I became angry against demons, and 
I suffered from anxiety of future plan of her liberation. At once, my body began 
expanding and I commenced destroying that lovely grove of Ravan. The scared birds 
and animals caused waking up of the sleeping demonesses. They rushed to Ravan, and 
informed him about destruction of the inner grove called pramada van. Ravan sent 
eighty thousand strong demons called kinkar , and they were equipped with trident and 
pestle. I killed all of them using an iron baton. Some of the survivors reported back to 
Ravan about the end of those demons. In the meanwhile, I destroyed the most beautiful 
temple structure having one hundred pillars, which was situated inside that grove. Ravan 
sent Jambumali, son of Prahast with large army. That demon was a ferocious warrior but 
I killed him with my great effort. After that, Ravan dispatched seven mighty sons of his 
minister. Using an iron baton, I dispatched them all to the death world. Following them, 
arrived five army heads of Lanka, and I eliminated them also. Soon Ravan sent his 
warrior son Akshakumar. Somehow I got hold of the legs of that son of Mandodari, who 
was skillful in warfare. Rotating him hundred times by his legs, I dashed him down 


Page 38 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


against ground, and he died. Ravan, then sent 21 his second son, Indrjeet who was 
mighty and champion in war. Very swiftly he used brahmastr against me, and I was put 
in bond of chains. When they produced me before Ravan, he asked me about my 
identity and my intention of visiting Lanka, and why did I kill so many demons." 

Hanuman described his further conversation with Ravan, “I replied him that I did all for 
the sake of Sita. I am a messenger of Ram and minister of Sugriv. My name is 
Hanuman, and I am a mental son of vayu god. I informed him that Sugriv had sent 
message for him, “Ram met me on rishyamuk mountain while searching Sita who had 
been abducted by you. Killing Vali by a single shaft, Ram restored my lost kingdom, and 
I am committed to find out Sita. You should immediately return Sita to Ram, before my 
monkey army kill you in Lanka.” Hearing message of Sugriv, Ravan became angry, and 
commanded for my death. His brother, Vibhishan interfered and pleaded, “Scriptures 
don’t enjoin killing of a messenger. It is natural that a messenger will truly convey the 
message of his master. At the most, a messenger can be spared by inflicting injury to 
some of his organs.” Ravan agreed to Vibhishan’s proposal, and he ordered to set my 
tail on fire. The demons wrapped varieties of cloths around my tail. They beat me with 
clenched fists, and batons, and put my tail on fire.” 

Hanuman described burning of Lanka, “I wanted to see Lanka in broad day light, and 
therefore, I preferred to remain in the fetters. They took me around through the streets of 
the city proclaiming my fault and consequent punishment. When I had familiarized 
myself with the city’s layout, I squeezed my body, and automatically the bonds dropped 
loose. Taking to my normal form, I took up an iron baton, and killed the demons taking 
me round the city. I rose to the terraces of the mansions, and burnt the entire city using 
the fire from my burning tail. Subsequently, I was seized with an apprehension of 
eliminating Sita also in the fire holocaust. I was grieved with my willful act, but soon I 
heard from the celestial bards ( charan ), that Sita was safe, and nothing had happened to 
her. Soon I realized the glory of Ram, that fire god had become cool on me, and saved 
my tail without any burn injury. Being overjoyed, I went back to Sita. Seeking her 
permission, I left Lanka gaining momentum from the top of arisht mountain.” 

Hanuman, concluding the story, requested them to plan for the future, and exhorted 
them to take up the balance initiatives for her immediate liberation. 

5-59 Hanuman exhorted monkeys (32 / 2592) 

Hanuman further mentioned, “I am greatly satisfied visiting Sita in ashok van. So far, we 
have successfully attained the target set by Ram and Sugriv. Sita has huge reserve of 
penance. Even fire could be destroyed by her one touch, but Ravan survived her 
abduction. I wonder whether Ravan has also great accumulation of power by penance. I 


Refer sarg 48 (shlok 11 though 22), where Ravan advised Indrajeet to go alone and face the monkey skillfully. But 
here in sarg 58, from shlok 128 though 131, it is mentioned that Indrajeet had come with army, and Hanuman first 
eliminated his accompanying army. 


Page 39 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


imagine his power must have by now been neutralized by this unrighteous act of 
abduction and soon he would meet his end.” 

Hanuman made a proposal, “If Jambvan and others agree, it would be proper, to first 
redeem Sita form our efforts, and then go with her to meet Ram. I am confident I alone 
can destroy Lanka with all demons. Since I didn’t have the mandate, I came back 
collecting relevant information. I am sure, Angad and Jambvan would alone can also 
eliminate the demons. Although Indrajeet is capable of shooting divine weapons which 
hit the target without being seen, but I would definitely annul all those weapons. With the 
active support of Neel, Dwvid and Maind (sons Aswini kumar ) we would be able to attain 
victory. I am not able to bear the plight of Sita. It is said, if a student pursues his study on 
pratipada (first day of the fortnight), his knowledge is tapered down (5-59-31), similarly 
staying in Lanka Sita is becoming thinner. Her body and sari are smeared with dust, so 
much so that her hair has turned into a single lock.” 

He further exhorted his fellow monkeys, “I feel privileged in mentioning that Lanka 
reverberates with my announcement 22 “Victory to Ram, and Lakshaman! Victory to 
Sugriv, a protege of Ram! I am a servant of Ram. I am son of vayu god, and my name is 
Hanuman (5-59-19/20)”. Demons are scared of hearing the word, ‘Hanuman’, because 
killing scores of demons, I alone burnt the entire Lanka. Now it is upto you to decide 
further course of action.” 

5-60 Excited Angad (20 / 2612) 

Hearing Hanuman, Angad expressed his excitement to act as advised by Hanuman. He 
mentioned, “Dwid and Maind are alone adequate to kill all the demons. To honour 
Aswinikumar, Brahma gave them boon of longevity. With the boon of Brahma they have 
become proud of their potential. Prevailing upon gods they have sipped nectar ( amrit ). 
Hanuman has already killed renowned demons and I am sure, I alone would eliminate 
the remaining ones. This would become several times magnified by active support of all 
of you.” 

Supporting Hanuman’s idea he mentioned, “I very much like the idea of Hanuman that 
we must redeem Sita before we go to meet Ram, Lakshaman and Sugriv.” 

Jambvan, the matured bear chief cautioned Angad, “I never doubt the capabilities of the 
mighty members of our team. My only point is of our mandate. Ram asked us to find out 
Sita, and retrieving her is his responsibility. If we get back Sita, he may find it against the 
practice of his dynasty. I, therefore, propose to defer our program, and first intimate Ram 
about our findings. Let him decide and command our further assignment.” 


22 w l trt : ?rafrr ritHuii($wiI<Hri 8 1 10 1 

■ 3 # eras l fg## ferrfcjrf w 1 20 1 5-59-19/20 


Page 40 of 44 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


5-61 Feast in madhuvan (24 / 2636) 

Angad and Hanuman readily consented to Jambvan’s proposal. Lead by Hanuman, they 
left for rishyamuk. Close to Kishkindha, they arrived near madhuvan , a special orchard 
of selected fruits and quality honey. This was under personal use of the king Sugriv, and 
he had deputed his maternal uncle Dadhimukh for its protection. 

Monkeys sought the permission of Angad to taste the fruits and honey of madhuvan. 
Taking prior concurrence of Jambvan and other elders, Angad allowed them to enjoy the 
pleasure of delicious fruits. 

Monkeys enjoyed the fruits and honey to their fill, and in the process they got 
intoxicated. The influence of liquor like honey, caused them behave freely, and they 
began producing varieties of dances and childish games. Dadhimukh, the protector of 
the orchard objected their presence. Monkeys were not in themselves, therefore, they 
lost sight of the royal displeasure and subsequent punishment. Dadhimukh’s protest was 
opposed by the monkeys. 

5-62 Complain to Sugriv (38 / 2664) 

Hanuman himself encouraged the monkeys of his team to enjoy the feast. He stood 
guard to them and made them free to take as much honey as they like. Monkeys 
enjoyed their liberty. Picking up the bee hives, they squeezed honey, and took as much 
as they could drink. Someone gulped as high as one dron (32 seer or almost 32 kg) at 
one time. Partly they drank, and partly they spoiled. 

Guards intimated the status of wanton destruction of the orchard by monkeys to 
Dadhimukh. He was angry, and he himself arrived to restrain the monkeys. Soon the 
combat ensued, and the monkeys thrashed the guards badly. When Dadhimukh 
attacked with an uprooted tree, Angad handled him personally, disregarding that 
Dadhimukh was his maternal grandfather (nana). 

Humiliated Dadhimukh, rushed to Sugriv by taking the sky root. When he reached close 
to Sugriv who was sitting with Ram and Lakshaman, he landed on ground, and pale 
faced, offered palm-folded salutation on the feet of Sugriv. 

5-63 Sugriv guessed the success in mission (33/ 2697) 

When Sugiv saw Dadhimukh sad, he enquired, “What is the matter, and what caused 
you to be here?” Dadhimukh intimated him, “ Madhuvan has been out of bounds so far, 
and I have been protecting it carefully since the period of your father Rikshraja ^Esnrrt, 
and elder brother Vali. None of you ever allowed anyone to willfully consume the 
products. Today, the monkeys lead by Hanuman, not only drank the honey, but caused 
major damage also to the trees. When they were checked by guards, they responded 
with anger and subsequently thrashed the guards as well. Finally the guards have been 
driven out." 


Page 41 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


Overhearing the conversation of Dadhimukh and Sugriv, Lakshaman enquired about the 
incident. Sugriv spoke to him, “There is good news. Madhuvan had been our ancestral 
property gifted to us by gods. Angad could never destroy the madhuvan, and his 
involvement in enjoying the honey and fruits suggests that south team has attained the 
goal of locating Sita. Hanuman is quite capable in accomplishing the assignment, and I 
guess he must have been pivotal in fulfilling our passionate desire.” 

Sugriv advised Dadhimukh, ‘not to worry’, and asked him to send Angad quickly to them. 

5-64 Arrival to Ram (45 / 2742) 

Dadhimukh taking the sky route speedily landed in madhuvan. On his return when he 
saw monkeys urinating honey mixed water, he guessed end of their intoxicated state 
and they were gaining back to normalcy. He met Angad, and submitted to him, “You 
have come back from a long distance. Please relax and enjoy as long as you like. We 
were mistaken, and I tender sincere apology to you. O Prince! You are our master. 
When Sugriv learnt about your arrival in madhuvan he has become excited to meet you. 
He wants you to see him immediately.” 

Angad addressed the monkeys, “By now you must have relaxed, and if you so wish let 
us go back to Ram.” Monkeys collectively praised Angad for his greatness and departed 
for Kishkindha. Angad and Hanuman using sky route arrived near Ram, and while 
landing they produced sweet sound. 

When Sugriv heard their sound, he submitted to Ram about attainment of the set goal, 
and pleaded, “In case of the failed mission, they would have never produced sound on 
their arrival, rather they would have come back quietly. I am sure they would have never 
come back to me empty handed after lapse of the target period. I have a hunch that 
Hanuman must have been successfully accomplished the objective.” 

Hanuman, while prostrating his head over Ram’s feet mentioned, “Sita, observing the 
penance of chastity is well.” Ram and Lakshaman were glad to hear his statement, “I 
have met venerable Sita.” 

5-65 Recital about Sita (28 / 2770) 

Lead by Angad, the monkeys offered their salute to Ram, Lakshaman and Sugriv who 
were seated over prasravan giri. They commenced telling the news about Sita, 
“Goddess Sita is detained in inner zone of Ravan’s Lanka. Demonesses on guard keep 
on threatening her. She has fond love for Ram, and Ravan had allowed her survival for 
two more months only. She is well without any injury.” 

When monkeys kept quiet, Ram asked further details of Sita, and wanted to know her 
attitude towards himself. Monkeys then encouraged Hanuman, who had met her, to 
take the lead in conversing with Ram. Hanuman offered his southward salute to Sita, 
and handing over the crest jewel to Ram which he had received from Sita, narrated the 
details, “Lanka is situated on southern shore of sea. Crossing one hundred yojan sea, I 


Page 42 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


landed in Lanka. I found her in pramada van , the central inner part of the city. She is well 
but immersed in your thought, she is in grip of grief. The demonesses keep on 
threatening her. Her hair has turned into a single lock. She sleeps on ground and she 
has nothing to do with Ravan. She has maintained the penance of chastity. I won her 
confidence when I recited the glory of Ikshavaku dynasty to her. I informed her about 
your friendship with Sugriv." 

Hanuman repeated her message to Ram, “I pray you to recall the story of the crow at 
chitrakoot. I had preserved this crest jewel with great effort. Having this with me I always 
enjoyed your close proximity to me. Now I part with this to convince you about my 
meeting Hanuman. I have abiding memory of mansil mark which you put over my 
forehead. I would survive one more month, and thereafter, lose my life at the hands of 
the demons." 

Narrating the details Hanuman submitted to make all preparations to cross sea forth 
with. 

5-66 Sorrowful Ram (15 / 2785) 

Holding the crest jewel by his chest Ram wept bitterly. Lakshaman also wept with him. 
With great sorrow, Ram spoke to Sugriv, “This crest jewel was a gift of king Janak to Sita 
on her marriage ceremony. This is a product of ocean, and Indr had gifted it to Janak. As 
a cow pours milk over calf, similarly my heart melts to see this crest jewel. Having seen 
this crest jewel, I recall meeting simultaneously my father Dasarath, and king Janak. I 
feel as if I am in union with Sita now.” 

Ram spoke to Hanuman, “If Sita has said that she would stay alive for one more month, 
it’s a large period. I can’t survive for a moment in her absence. I urge upon you to take 
me there where you have seen her. Tell me in more details what she intended to convey 
to me.” 

5-67 Sita’s message to Ram (44 / 2829) 

As desired by Ram, Hanuman narrated what he had heard from Sita, “Once both of you 
were sleeping in chitrakoot. She got up before you. A crow injured 23 her chest with his 
beak. When you slept in her lap, the crow again pecked her chest and caused bleeding. 
You woke up due to her pain, and looking around noticed the crow having blood stained 
claw. It is learnt that crow was son of Indr who used to move on earth with wind speed. 
With an intention to punish him you charged a blade of kush grass with brahmashtr. He 
sought refuge to gods but none could provide any protection. Finally he fell on your feet 
and taking mercy on him you spared his life by damaging his right eye only. Thereafter 
saluting you on earth, and your father in heaven, he went back. Sita wants to convey to 
you that when you are so much capable, why don’t you charge your infallible shaft 


Compare sarg 38, shlok 24 through 33, with this sarg 67, shlok 9 through 17. 


Page 43 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


sundar kand 


against the demons. She further sought interference of mighty Lakshaman and 
wondered why he is sitting quiet. “ 

Hanuman further continued, “I tried to assure her that your grief had subdued his mind 
and once he would learn about your location, he would not delay for a moment." 

She gave me her crest jewel which she had kept tied in some cloth. After receiving that 
when I enlarged my size to take a leap, she held me back saying, “you are fortunate to 
have a view of lotus eyed Ram and mighty Lakshaman.” 

I offered her to ride my back to carry her to you. She turned down my offer mentioning, 
“For a chaste woman it is not proper to voluntarily touch someone else. My contact with 
Ravan was forced upon me over which I had no control.” Thereafter she advised me to 
pray you and Lakshaman to expedite the mission of taking her back. She also asked me 
to convey this message in presence of Sugriv that demonesses continue torturing her. 
She saw me off, wishing my auspicious and safe return. 

5-68 Sita’s apprehension narrated (29 / 2858) 

Hanuman disclosed the doubt haunting in the mind of Sita, “Before I departed she 
asked me to stay one more day 24 for her satisfaction and to cut down her sorrow.” In 
continuity of her talk she expressed her doubt, “ Garud , vayu and you are capable of 
crossing this sea. I wonder how your other colleagues would cross this vast sea. I 
understand you alone can bring about the end of all the demons, but Ram will be 
deprived of earning the credit of ending the dominance of demons. I don’t want the 
repetition of the thief like act of Ravan, that the way I was brought in stealthily here, I am 
taken back out in the same fashion. It would be proper if Ram comes himself, and after 
crushing the demons, I am taken back with dignity.” 

Hanuman conveyed further to Ram, “I assured her about the potential of the monkeys in 
Sugriv’s army. It is a common practice that only an ordinary and junior member of the 
team is sent as messenger. If I being an ordinary among them can cross the sea where 
is the question of having doubt about others. Those monkeys in Sugriv’s army have 
several time visited freely all the places over earth. While coming with the monkey army, 
I would carry Ram and Lakshaman over my shoulder across sea. Once both the 
brothers land in Lanka, their infallible shafts would bring about complete elimination of 
the demons’ race from the earth. After winning you back, and on expiry of his exile 
period, when Ram would return to Ayodhya, he will soon be crowned as sovereign king. 
I am sure my reassuring words have brought peace to her mind.” 


24 

Contents of shlok 3 through 28 of this sarg 68 are identical to, (and most of them verbatim repetition of) sh/ok 20, 
and shlok 26 through 50 of sarg 39. Some of them are comparable with relevant shlok of sarg 56 also. 


Page 44 of 44 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : yuddh kand 


Srimate Ramanuiava namah 

Preface 

Yuudh kand is the sixth kand of adikavya Valmiki Ramayan. Some section of devotees take this 
as the end of Valmiki Ramayan , whereas some others take Uttar Kand also as part and parcel of 
it. It is a matter of perception. The coronation of bhagwan Ram is completed in the last sarg 128 
and thereafter the glory of the Ramayan is also mentioned in detail, therefore taking it as a logical 
conclusion of Ramayan is well taken. 

This kand may also be termed as Vijay kand. This kand has a lot of astrological and astronomical 
references. The concept of twin stars in punarvasu tjrrj and vishakha fcTPTf is noteworthy. 
Mars w and Mercury <pr inimical to both of rohini frMr and, or moon qrrr appear to be quite 
relevant. Discussion of auspicious period in in sarg 6-4 indicating favorable moon in 

front of journey direction is interesting. 

The number of Sarg and shlok in each kand are as below: 


Bal 

77 

2266 

Ayodhya 

119 

4310 

Aranya 

75 

2467 

Kishkindha 

67 

2362 

sundar 

68 

2858 

yuddh 

128 

5784 

Total 

534 

20047 


The shlok 6-72-11 1 is not found in some versions of Valmiki. One may refer to shlok 6-6-17 I 18, where Ravan 
expresses his own impression about the divinity of Ram that he is capable of either crossing the ocean, bridging 
it or drying up. In the background of the shlok 6-6-17 / 18, the shlok 6-72-11 appears to be relevant. Ravan was 
actually in doubt about the divinity of Ram at initial stage, but gradually his ignorance was cleared, and through 
6-72-11 he accepts his supreme divinity. By this time he has almost lost all his sons except Indrajeet. He was at a 
point of no return, and therefore, he couldn’t move for truce. Upon death of Kumbhakarn, he had expressed his 
renunciation from the world, and he mentioned that it was of no use to live longer here. 

A reference is invited to sarg 6-74 where Hanuman jee is shown to visit place of lord Hayagreev on the Himalayas. 
One can visit aushadh giri 3fFRT PtTf today at Thiruvahindpuram (also called Thiruvandipuram), near Cuddalore, 
Tamil Nadu, India. Loard Hayagreev Si|'j|c| has two manifestations here: one with goddess Lakshm i called Lakshmi 
- Haygreev Wit S4‘JI4, and the other alone in meditative posture called Yoga Hayagreev 4fT S4'jl4. Vedantdesik 
Swami had pleased lord Haygreev here with his severe penance. It is said when Hanuman jee carried the herb 
mountain, a part of it has been placed here with the command of lord Hayagreev. 

Srimann Narayan Charnau Sharnam Prapaddye. («fl*HKI4 u l STW); gtRf ) 

Submission: 

Srikrishna Prapnnachari 

Falgun Shukl Purnima, Holi, February 28, 2010 


1 6-72-11 stands for 6 as yuddh kand (6 th kand), 72 is sarg number of yuddh kand, and 11 is shlok number in sarg 72. 


I 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : yuddh kand 


Contents 

page 

6-1 Concern about crossing sea (19 / 19) 1 

6-2 Sugriv’s patience (24 / 43) 1 

6-3 Hanuman sought early departure (33 / 76) 1 

6-4 Departure to sea shore (121 / 197) 2 

6-5 Sita remembered (23 / 220) 4 

6-6 Ravan sought advice (18 / 238) 4 

6-7 Confident demons (25 / 263) 5 

6-8 Conceited demons (24 / 287) 5 

6-9 Vibhishan’s advice (23 / 310) 6 

6-10 Vibhishan visited Ravan (29 / 339) 7 

6-11 Ravan in royal court (31 / 370) 7 

6-12 Demons’ deliberations (40 / 410) 8 

6-13 Compulsion of a curse (21 / 431) 9 

6-14 Vibhishan repeated his submission (22 / 453) 9 

6-15 Indrajeet ridiculed Vibhishan (14 / 467) 10 

6-16 Departure of Vibhishan (26 / 493) 10 

6-17 Vibhishan arrived to sea shore (68 / 561) 11 

6-18 Ram granted interview to Vibhishan (39 / 600) 12 

6-19 Vibhishan’s coronation (41 / 641) 13 

6-20 Ravan’s spy Shuk (34/ 675) 14 

6-21 Ram in wrath over sea (35 / 710) 15 

6-22 Bridge across sea (89 / 799) 15 

6-23 Bad omens over Lanka (16 / 815) 17 

6-24 Sugirva’s preparations and Shuk reporting to Ravan (44 / 859) 17 

6-25 Ravan’s spy Shuk and Saran (33 / 892) 18 

6-26 Ravan took a look at army chiefs of monkeys (47 / 939) 19 

6-27 Saran continued introducing monkey chiefs (48 / 987) 19 

6-28 Further introduction by Shuk (42 / 1029) 20 

6-29 Ravan rebuked Shuk and Saran (29 / 1058) 21 

6-30 Shardul’s information to Ravan (35 / 1093) 22 

6-31 Sita in dilemma (45 / 1138) 23 

6-32 Wailing Sita (44 / 1182) 23 

ii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : yuddh kand 


6-33 Sita consoled (38 / 1220) 23 

6-34 Sarma posted Sita with truth (28 / 1248) 24 

6-35 Malyavan’s attempt to reason with Ravan (37 / 1285) 25 

6-36 Malyavan condemned (22 / 1307) 26 

6-37 Ram deputed warriors (37 / 1340) 26 

6-38 Ram at suvel top (20 / 1360) 27 

6-39 Lanka viewed from Suvel (28 / 1388) 27 

6-40 Sugriv wrestled with Ravan (30 / 1418) 27 

6-41 An envoy - Angad (99 / 1517) 28 

6-42 Monkeys fought demons (47 / 1564) 30 

6-43 Demons suffered humiliation (46 / 1610) 30 

6-44 Ram and Lakshaman in serpent noose (39 / 1649) 31 

6-45 Monkeys in deep shock (28 / 1677) 31 

6-46 Victorious Indrajeet met Ravan (50 / 1727) 32 

6-47 Sita in pushpak viman brought to Ram and Lakshaman (24 / 1751) 32 

6-48 Trijata consoled Sita (37 / 1788) 33 

6-49 Ram back to consciousness (33 / 1821) 34 

6-50 Ram and Lakhaman freed of serpent chains (65 / 1886) 34 

6-51 Dejected Ravan dispatched Dhumraksh (36 / 1922) 35 

6-52 Hanuman killed Dhumraksh (38 / 1960) 36 

6-53 Vajradanshtr in command (32 / 1992) 36 

6-54 Vajradanshtr killed (37 / 2029) 36 

6-55 Akampan on battle ground (32/ 2061) 37 

6-56 Hanuman killed Akampan (39 / 2100) 37 

6-57 Prahast on move (44 / 2144) 38 

6-58 Neel killed Prahast (61 / 2205) 38 

6-59 Ravan humiliated on ground (146 / 2351) 39 

6-60 Waking up of Kumbhakarn (98 / 2449) 42 

6-61 Ram learnt about Kumbhakarn (40 / 2489) 44 

6-62 Kumbhakarn met Ravan (24 / 2513) 44 

6-63 Kumbhakarn criticized Ravan ( 58 / 2571) 45 

6-64 Mahodar’s short cut (36 / 2607) 45 

6-65 Kumbhakarn to Battleground (57/ 2664) 46 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : yuddh kand 


6-66 Panicked monkeys (33 / 2697) 47 

6-67 Ram killed Kumbhakarn (177 / 2874) 47 

6-68 Wailing Ravan (24 / 2898) 49 

6-69 Angad killed Narantak (96 / 2994) 49 

6-70 Hanuman, Rishabh, and Neel killed eminent demons (67 / 3061) 50 

6-71 Lakshaman killed Atikaya (116 / 3177) 51 

6-72 Ravan’s anxiety (19 / 3196) 52 

6-73 Ram and Lakshaman made unconscious (74 / 3270) 53 

6-74 Hanuman brought herbal mountain (77 / 3347) 54 

6-75 Lanka torched again (69 / 3416) 55 

6-76 Killing of eminent demon warriors (94 / 3510) 55 

6-77 Hanuman killed Nikumbh (24 / 3534) 57 

6-78 Makaraksh on battle ground (21 / 3555) 57 

6-79 Ram killed Makaraksh (41 / 3596) 57 

6-80 Indrajeet again over battle ground (43 / 3639) 58 

6-81 Killing of fake Sita (34 / 3673) 58 

6-82 Hanuman fought valiantly (28 / 3701) 59 

6-83 Wailing Ram (44 / 3745) 60 

6-84 Vibhishan consoled Ram (23 / 3768) 60 

6-85 Lakshaman at nikumbhila temple (36/ 3804) 60 

6-86 Operation nikumbhila (35 / 3839) 61 

6-87 Cordoning of the banyan tree (30 / 3869) 61 

6-88 Lakshaman fought Indrajeet (77 / 3946) 61 

6-89 Indrajeet lost charioteer and horses (53 / 3999) 62 

6-90 Indrajeet eliminated (94 / 4093) 62 

6-91 Rejoicing of monkeys (29 / 4122) 63 

6-92 Sorrowful Ravan (68 / 4190) 64 

6-93 Ram killed demons army (39 / 4229) 65 

6-94 Wailing demonnesses condemned Shurpanakha (41 / 4270) 66 

6-95 Ravan on battle ground (54 / 4324) 66 

6-96 Sugriv killed Virupaksh (36 / 4360) 67 

6-97 Sugriv killed Mahodar (38 / 4398) 67 

6-98 Angad killed Mahaparshv (26 / 4424) 68 


IV 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : yuddh kand 


6-99 Ram and Ravan in combat (51 / 4475) 68 

6-100 Lakshaman hit to unconsciousness (62 / 4537) 69 

6-101 Lakshaman revived (56 / 4593) 70 

6-102 Ram over celestial chariot (70 / 4663) 70 

6-103 Ravan driven out safely (31 / 4694) 71 

6-104 Ravan back to the battle ground (27 / 4721) 71 

6-105 Adityahrudaya (31/4752) 72 

6-106 Forebodings on battle ground (36 / 4788) 74 

6-107 Fierce fighting of Ram and Ravan (67 / 4855) 75 

6-108 End of Ravan (34/4889) 75 

6-109 Wailing Vibhishan (25 / 4914) 76 

6-110 Wailing wives of Ravan (26 / 4940) 77 

6-111 Last rites of Ravan (124 / 5064) 77 

6-112 Coronation of Vibhishan, and Flanuman to Sita (26 / 5090) 78 

6-113 Flanuman back with Sita’s message (53 / 5143) 78 

6-114 Sita visited Ram (36 / 5179) 79 

6-115 Ram showed reservation to accept her (25 / 5204) 80 

6-116 Sita on trial (36 / 5240) 81 

6-117 Brahma glorified Ram (32 / 5272) 81 

6-118 Sita sanctified (22 / 5294) 81 

6-119 Dasarath turned to Ram (39 / 5333) 82 

6-120 Indr revived dead monkeys (24 / 5357) 83 

6-121 Vibhishan’s hosting (30/5387) 83 

6-122 Departure to Ayodhya (27 / 5414) 84 

6-123 Places on way to Ayodhya (57 / 5471) 84 

6-124 Ram met Bhardwaj (23 / 5494) 85 

6-125 Flanuman on errand (46 / 5540) 86 

6-126 Flanuman recited legend of Ram (55 / 5595) 86 

6-127 Preparations to welcome Ram (64 / 5659) 87 

6-128 Coronation ceremony (125 / 5784) 88 


v 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Srimate Ramanujaya namah 

Yuddh kand 
(128 sarg) 

6-1 Concern about crossing sea (19 / 19) 

Ram was extremely glad to hear the details narrated by Hanuman. He praised 
Hanuman, “Except three: garud, vayu and you, nobody is capable of crossing sea. By 
doing this you have done a great work so far unheard over earth. None of the gods, or 
among celestial beings can escape alive from Lanka as you have done. There are three 
categories of attendants. Excellent category, who performs as commanded and 
something more related to the main command. Medium category, who performs what is 
commanded, and does not care for some more related aspect of the main one, even if 
he has ability to perform. Poor category, who doesn’t perform what is commanded 
although he has ability to do that. You belong to the excellent category.” 

Ram showed his inability to think of a precious gift worthy for Hanuman. Lastly, he said I 
don’t have anything more worthy than my embracing, and saying that he embraced 
Hanuman within his arms close to his chest. 

Turning towards Sugriv, he mentioned, “As reported to me, Sita has rightly expressed 
her concern about crossing the sea. I am also greatly concerned about that. Do you see 
any solution to it?” 

6-2 Sugriv’s patience (24 / 43) 

Sugriv demonstrated well composed mind and spoke to Ram, “Our monkeys are quite 
capable, and only thing we have to do is to take them across sea to Lanka. They have 
also magical power to transform themselves to the desired form. I seek your sincere 
advice on devising out a bridge across sea. Let us not be unnecessarily afraid of the 
problem. There must be some befitting solution to it, which I am sure with your kind 
blessing we will find out. Our arrival in Lanka itself is indicative of our victory.” 

6-3 Hanuman sought early departure (33 / 76) 

Praising Sugriv for his patience, Ram spoke to Hanuman, “By dint of power of penance I 
can either bridge the sea or dry it up. In any case, crossing 1 is no issue against my 
potential. I need to know in detail the strategic forts and army strength of Lanka.” 

Hanuman described the details, “ Lanka is on the southern sea shore and is inaccessible 
because of vast sea. It has surrounded by mountains, forest, rivers and deep ditches 
which has made it impregnable. It is situated on mountain top. Wide as well as deep 
ditches along the ramparts are full of cold water and marine creatures i.e. , large fish, 


1 aw ’TpTSR WT55T^R W I ’PTSJlfo wfefa UHKHIIHI I I 6-3-2 


Page 1 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


crocodiles etc. and it is difficult to cross the ditches. There are four gates, one in each of 
the cardinal directions. These gates are made of strong doors with provision heavy 
locking bars. The high ramparts made of gold are beautifully carved with varieties of 
precious gems, pearls, and coral pieces. The guard standing on four gates has the 
strength: east - ten thousand with tridents and swords; south - one hundred thousand in 
all four categories i.e. , cavalry, elephants, chariots, and infantry; west - one million with 
swords; north - one hundred million with chariots and horses. The central Lanka has 
above ten million strong warriors. All the four gates have provision of showering rocks 
and arrows over enemies preventing their easy entry to Lanka. The entry to the gates is 
managed by moving bridges across the deep ditches. These bridges have mechanical 
control, and as the situation demands, they can be folded up restricting the crossing of 
the ditches.” 

Hanuman mentioned, “During my recent operation in Lanka, I destroyed the ramparts, 
and ditches have been filled up. About one quarter of the army has also been eliminated. 
Besides, majority of weapon stores have been burnt to ashes.” 

Assessing the strength of demons he mentioned, “We hardly need large army. Angad, 
Jambvan, Dwvid, Maind, Panas, Nal and Neel are enough to kill all the demons. Once 
we are there, we can easily win Lanka, and take back Sita. Now kindly permit us to 
depart in an auspicious muhurt to the sea shore.” 

6-4 Departure to sea shore (121 / 197) 

Consenting to Hanuman’s proposal, Ram announced, “Let us move in the mid of the day 
today itself without any delay. Every day’s noon is said to be having vijay muhurth which 
is auspicious for journey. Today is uttraphalguni 2 nakshatr (6-4-5) and tomorrow moon 
will enter into hasta nakshtr. We should make a move today in uttraphalguni itself. I have 
noticed auspicious omens. The pulsating upper right eyelid indicates coming of good 
days ahead. We shall sure win the demons.” 

Sugriv and Lakshaman were glad to hear his announcement. Ram further advised, “Let 
Neel, being the army chief, proceed as advance contingent with one hundred thousand 
of monkeys setting the way forward. He should identify comfortable route full of fruits, 
honey and drinking water for the following army. The route should provide ample shed of 
trees for tired army to relax. He should take full precaution in observing whether the 
enemy demons had treacherously poisoned the sources of water and honey, or fruits. 
He should also be watchful to gather information about enemy’s gathering in some hide 
out, who may attack on our army unaware from the rear side.” 


2 Leaving first quarter, in the balance three quarters of uttraphalguni ^mrwj4l J&r, the moon enters into kanya 
(virgo) rashi 3F3T uPr of zodiac sign, and it stays in kanya 3FW uPr for full of hasta nakshatr wm low and half of 
chitra nakshatra fam =rm~. The moon of virgo cf&rr xiPr is said to occupy the south, and if moon falls in front while 
travelling, it is considered most auspicious. The journey for sea shore is south bound, therefore, moon of 
uttraphalguni (except its first quarter) 73ET being of south shall lie in front. This is the earliest possible 

occurrence of auspicious period for journey to south when moon lies in front. 


Page 2 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Considering full safety and protection in mind, he further made the strategic formation of 
the main army, “The main army shall be lead by Gaj, Gavay, and Gavaksh. Rishabh will 
move on the right protecting the army, while left side shall be protected by Gandhmadan. 
Jambvan, Sushen, and Vegdarshi shall be in-charge of the rear guard. I would enjoy the 
shoulders of Hanuman (like airavat of Indr while Lakshaman shall be on the 
shoulders of Angad (like sarvbhaum elephant of kuber ^ ). With Sugriv, I and 
Lakshaman shall remain in the centre, and shall maintain watch over the entire moving 
army.” 

Following Ram’s strategic formations, soon they made the departure. The monkeys 
enjoyed the journey by entering into several games and body jokes. Someone uprooted 
a tree and carried that as a club over his shoulder. A few were seen suddenly mounting 
the shoulder of some other monkey who in turn gave a vigorous jerk to throw the 
monkey from shoulder to ground. With full entertainment, the army, thus continued 
proceeding towards south. They moved past sahyagiri mountain range. The moving 
contingent carefully avoided passing through the living settlements of human beings. 

Ram and Lakshaman mounted over Hanuman and Angad respectively, looked like sun 
and moon, in conjunction 3 with the largest of the planets (6-4-41) (viz., Jupiter and 
Venus). Lakshaman had a feeling of good omens. He spoke to Ram, “I have noticed 
several auspicious things indicating better days ahead. Cool breeze, sweet and mild 
sound of the birds and animals are noteworthy. Sun is bright but pleasing. Venus 4 is on 
our back (6-4-48). The constellation of seven stars of sages is seen happily giving round 
of the brilliant pole star. Among several stars in the sky, royal sage Trishanku, one of the 
forefathers of Ikshavaku dynasty is present with sage Vashishth in our front (6-4-49). 
The asterism of vishakha feirar, considered as auspicious for Ikshavaku house, is free 
from afflictions of any of the malefic stars. Mula nakshatr is known favourable for 

demons, and its deity is nirruti fefrT; this asterism is currently afflicted by dhumketu frog, 
(6-4-51) malefic comet. This is indicative of impending calamity over demons." 

Without any break, the contingent kept on moving 5 day and night (6-4-68 /69). The 
impressive size of the strong contingent is indicated by one of the events that when they 
crossed any river, water current not only stopped rather began flowing in reverse 
direction, i.e. , towards upstream side. On way, the presence of abundant number of 
varieties of fruits and flowers bearing trees, lakes covered with lotuses reverberating with 
chirping birds, suggested the country was rich in readily available natural resources. 


3 This example has dual purpose. It also indicates that at that time moon was in conjunction with Jupiter. Sun 
together with Venus occupied the same zodiac sign. 

4 

Venus ) is known as one eyed, and from consideration of sakun pldri propriety of omen), auspicious position of one eyed 
person is always on back, so that he is not visible in the forward direction of the movement. View of one eyed person while on 
journey is indicative of bad omen. 

5 This is confirmed by the description of disposition of various night stars (viz., constellation of seven stars of sages, and Venus) by 
Lakshaman. 


Page 3 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Besides delicious fruits, the monkeys enjoyed drinking the readily available honey over 
the trees, and crystal clear water of the lakes. 

Crossing sahya and malaya mountain ranges, Ram arrived at mahendra giri abutting 
close on the sea shore. He heard the roaring tides of the sea, and noticed varieties of 
marine creatures leaping with the tides. The sea and sky had comparable features. They 
apparently looked like meeting each other at a remote distance. The stars in the sky 
were like gems of the sea. The drifting clouds of the sky, were like tides of the sea. The 
sound of splashing tides in sea, were like gods trumpeting in sky. Coming to sea shore, 
the contingent of monkeys, also looked like another sea characterized by light golden 
colour. Their sound subdued the sound of the tides. They took their position according to 
their group in which they had been moving. 

Settling them down, Ram proposed, “Now let us relax here. We will have to find out way 
for crossing the sea. Disregarding the formidable dimension of the issue, I am sure we 
will soon have the solution.” 

6-5 Sita remembered (23 / 220) 

While looking towards sea, Ram recalled the sweet memory of Sita. He mentioned to 
Lakshaman, “The ignition of her separation is continuously on rise. The sorrow is known 
to subdue with time, but reverse is the case with me. I can’t tolerate the heat, and to cool 
it down, I would like to take shelter in deep sea water. I am more worried of the fast 
lapsing of the time period fixed for her life. I wonder how she would have been pulling 
with the devil demonesses. O Royal daughter of Janak, and lovely daughter-in-law of 
Dasarth! How you would have been spending your night there! When shall I be able to 
tear apart the chest of Ravan?” 

Pondering thus, the day came to its end, and as sun was setting down, Ram performed 
his normal sandhya vandan. 

6-6 Ravan sought advice (18 / 238) 

Ravan’s mind was haunted by the ravages caused by Hanuman. He called the meeting 
of the royal council and addressing its members sought their counsel, “It is really 
shocking that a monkey entered Lanka, met Sita, and left the city causing untold misery. 
He killed the selected warriors and razed the city to dust. We are here to think seriously 
about this. I am sure Ram would cross the sea 6 and arrive in Lanka with his brother and 
monkeys’ army. He would either dry up the sea, or would find out some alternative 
solution (6-6-17/18).” 

Ravan considered several aspects of advice, “ I know about three categories of persons. 
Those who seek counsel of his well wishers and friends and act accordingly are of 
excellent category. One who ponders over the issue alone, takes decision, and 


6 *r garfri w s w l w ^njjr s wrrfr s I I ^ i 6-6-17 / 18 


Page 4 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


implements on his own is of medium category. Those who, without weighing the pros 
and cons, take decision alone of doing a work, without seeking blessing of gods, and 
leaves the work undone, are of poor category. The advice is also of three categories. 
The advice which is decided unanimously by all is of excellent category. The one which 
is initially opposed by some section of advisors but later receives unanimous support is 
of medium category. When an idea is opposed by all, and diverse opinions are 
presented, but later receives the full support is bound to be of poor category.” 

Quoting as above, Ravan proposed, “My aim of discussing with you is to arrive at an 
excellent course of action. How should we prepare ourselves against the impending 
situation?” 

6-7 Confident demons (25 / 263) 

Hearing Ravan’s query and concern, the demons unanimously expressed their 
confidence, and reminded Ravan of his high potential. They mentioned, “We need to 
assess our potential well, and taking a look at the past performances we are sure of our 
victory. Kuber, known for his close friendship with Shiv has been easily vanquished by 
you, and you captured his viman (air chariot). The snakes of Bhogavatipuri had 
surrendered before you. The great demon, Maya impressed by your potential made 
you friend, and offered his daughter to you. Mighty demon, Madhu, your brother-in-law 
married to your sister kumbhnasi, has become your protege. You have subjugated all 
the mighty demons under your rule. The four fold army of warrior sons of Varun had 
been easily crushed by you. The deadly yamlok (death world) has seen your stirring 
strength. The renowned khastriya of earth had already been defeated by you. Let there 
be no concern about this ordinary Ram. We are sure you will easily kill him.” 

The demons further recalled the prowess demonstrated by Indrajeet, “In full presence of 
the strong army of gods, Indrajeet alone captured Indr, and kept him imprisoned in 
Lanka. When we have Indrajeet among us you need not worry about such trifling issue. 
He has earned immense power on performing maheshwar ygya, and he can alone kill 
Ram and his monkey army before they land in Lanka.” 

6-8 Conceited demons (24 / 287) 

Prahast expressed his confidence with folded hands to Ravan, “We have defeated gods, 
demons, gandharv, monsters, eagles, and snakes and in their comparison, these two 
ascetics can hardly stand our attack. We were unaware, and therefore, that monkey 
deceitfully demonstrated his impudence otherwise, I wouldn’t have spared his life. I wait 
for your command, and I promise to make this world including all mountains, sea, and 
forests without monkey. You shouldn’t be worried about Sita’s abduction that by doing 
this you have done anything wrong.” 

Durmukh termed the impudence of Hanuman as unpardonable offence and he sought 
permission to cause elimination of all the monkeys from all the places on earth. 


Page 5 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Vajradanshtr , wielding his blood soaked iron baton, spoke in great anger, “I ignore the 
poor monkey Hanuman, and crave to eliminate using my deadly baton Ram, Lakshaman 
and Sugriv without any delay. Alternatively, selected warriors among us, using art of 
sorcery, should form a group of humans, and meet Ram saying that Bharat has sent us 
for his assistance. Believing us, Ram would march with monkeys. We would then taking 
our position in sky shower rocks, and our deadly weapons over them. This would thus 
easily eliminate the monkeys as well as Ram and Lakshaman.” 

Nikumbh, son of Kumbhakam, asked the permission that he would go alone and 
eliminate Ram, Lakshaman, Sugriv, Hanuman and other monkeys. 

Vajrahanu, having mountainous body, licking his blood stained lips, asserted, “Kindly 
allow me, and I would alone devour all of them. None of you has to be concerned about 
this." 

6-9 Vibhishan’s advice (23 / 310) 

The valiant warriors, Nikumbh, Rabhas, Suryasatru, Suptaghn, Ygyakop, Mahaparshv, 
Mahodar, Agniketu, Rashmiketu, Indrajeet, Prahast, Virupaksh, Vajrdanshtr, 
Dhumraksh, Atikaya and Durmukh equipped with their deadly weapons rushed close to 
Ravan and sought his permission to allow them to move forthwith and eliminate the 
enemy. 

Vibhishan interfered and pacifying them brought them back to their seats. He, then stood 
up leaving his seat, and with folded hands submitted to Ravan, “Use of force is required 
when three known policies 7 of wr conciliation (praise), ^ gift, and dissension fail to 
yield result. We should not underestimate our enemy. Ram is fully alert, and the monkey 
called Hanuman who came crossing the vast sea should not be taken as a trifling. If we 
attack without assessing them properly we may invite unwarranted trouble on us." 

He further analyzed the prevailing situation, “If we are excited to retaliate the death of 
Khar, I take this our another wrong approach. Ram didn’t attack over Khar, it was Khar 
who made an attack and was killed when Ram resorted to his self protection. The 
abduction of Sita, consequent to killing of Khar, is a wrong step and I propose to return 
Sita to Ram. For sake of wellbeing of prosperous Lanka, it would be proper that before 
Ram makes an attack Sita should be returned to him." 

Addressing Ravan, politely he submitted, “O My respectful elder brother! You should 
discard anger, and adopt the course of righteousness, and this only can bring about our 
well being.” 

Hearing Vibhishan’s advice, Ravan dispersed the meeting, and went to his inner palace. 


7 


i n j T 


conciliation, gift, dissension, and punishment are the four famous royal strategies of statecraft. 


Page 6 of 91 




Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-10 Vibhishan visited Ravan (29 / 339) 

Next day in the morning, Vibhishan again made an attempt to convince Ravan, and with 
this objective he visited his palace. Ravan’s palace was like a brilliant mountain top, and 
after crossing series of beautifully decorated gates and several grand halls, he reached 
where Ravan was seated with his closest ministers. When he arrived, Brahmins were 
about to finish auspicious recitations ( swasti vachan 3TTT ) to ensure his victory. 

The Brahmins were holding the bowls of yogurt and ghee w. They were honoured 
with sprinkling of holy rice and flowers over them. 

On his arrival Vibhishan was duly respected, and thereafter, he offered his auspicious 
salutation to Ravan, “Hail to the venerable master!”. Responding his salutation, Ravan 
indicated him to take his specified seat. Pleasing Ravan with his humble words, 
Vibhishan made a submission, “From the moment Sita has been brought in Lanka, I 
notice occurrences of several bad omens: (i) contrary to the common experience, when 
the wooden pieces are rubbed to produce fire in the oblation square, they produce more 
smoke than fire, (ii) the oblation fire has prevalence of smoke than fire, (iii) cows have 
reduced the yield of milk, (iii) jackals cry in morning and evening near the palaces, (iv) 
asses, donkeys and horses shed tears, (v) snakes are seen at oblation squares, (vi) 
swarm of ants creep into the oblation stuff, (vii) crows in groups crow harshly over the 
palaces, (viii) vultures perch over the palace terraces. Such notices don’t auger well for 
us. I therefore pray you to return Sita to her husband Ram." 

Ravan burst with anger, “Vibhishan, I don’t find any cause of fear and nervousness. Ram 
will never get back his wife Sita. Even if he seeks help of Indr and other gods, he can’t 
get Sita." 

Saying thus, he dispersed the meeting, and saw off his brother, Vibhishan. 

6-11 Ravan in royal court (31 / 370) 

Anxiety to make Sita his own life partner had been permanently haunting in the mind of 
Ravan. Having failed to attain his goal, apparently he looked weak. With a view to 
materialize his objective at the earliest he thought of eliminating his enemy, and 
therefore he wanted to discuss it with his ministers and members of the royal council. 
Riding a magnificent chariot, pulled by horses, he left for the royal conference hall. His 
movement was announced by customary sound of trumpets and conch. The sound of 
the moving wheels of his chariot was heard all over Lanka. His advance escort was large 
infantry equipped with swords and other weapons. The rear guard consisted of cavalry, 
and chariots equipped with varieties of weapons. 

White brilliant umbrella over his head on the chariot was made of gold and precious 
gems. He was flanked by attendants holding precious silver and gold chavar fanning 
lightly on his sides. On way people kept greeting him with folded hands standing on the 
shoulders of the main street. 


Page 7 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


He arrived in the conference hall which was an excellent creation of viswakarma 
(celestial architect). The floors and walls were beautifully decorated with gold, silver and 
other precious gems. The welcome carpet was made of cushion silk having golden 
embroideries. His splendorous throne had cover to his seat with soft deer skin. The hall 
was permeated with scented fragrance of sandal and incenses. When he took his seat, 
he commanded to invite all the council members. The messengers moved swiftly from 
house to hose inviting the elite council members. 

Soon the members arrived riding their chariots, and parking them at suitable places, 
moved on foot inside the conference hall. Their entry resembled as if scores of lions 
were entering a cave. Being inside the hall, they offered their respect to Ravan holding 
his feet, and hailing him to be victorious. They continued occupying their respective 
seats. The arrival of Vibhishan was marked by his splendid chariot pulled by horses. 
Entering the conference hall, he uttered his name, and offered his salutation to the feet 
of the demon king. Soon after Vibhishan, followed Prahast and Shuk who repeated what 
Vibhishan had done. They were all offered their respective seats. 

6-12 Demons’ deliberations (40 / 410) 

Ravan commanded army chief, Prahast, to immediately depute able guards at suitable 
locations inside and outside the city. Prahasta moved out, and implementing the king’s 
command of posting the guards appropriately, he returned and reported to Ravan what 
he had done. 

When Prahast took his seat, Ravan addressed the councilors, “Whenever crisis had 
arisen affecting the performance of dharm (duty), attainment of arth (wealth), and 
fulfillment of kam (facilities), I have received worthy suggestions through this council. As 
moon is served by planets, and Indr by marudgan, I also cherish to continue receiving 
your active support. I intended to summon this council earlier but due to absence of 
Kumbhakarn I couldn’t do that. We all know after lapse of six months of his sleep, he is 
now awake. I have abducted Sita, wife of Ram, from Janasthan. I wanted to make her 
my wife but the ill fated woman didn’t favour to oblige me. I tell you, there is no beautiful 
woman on this earth comparable to Sita. She is like an idol carved from gold 
purposefully created by the magic of Mayasur TTEp" . She is well composed, sweet and 
the beauty of autumn moon is inferior to her charming face.” 

Describing his state of mind Ravan mentioned, “I am afflicted by her charming gaze and 
I can’t afford to forget her. She 8 had sought one year period awaiting Ram’s arrival. I am 
extremely immersed in the lust for Sita, so much so that whether in sleep, awake, in 
anger or pleasure I am not able to keep her away from my mind. You are aware of the 
dare devil deeds of a monkey who caused immense damage to Lanka. It is learnt Ram, 


Ravan had lied here in the council, as would be evident from the succeeding sarg 13. In fact, afraid of a curse, he 
couldn't touch Sita with lust, and on his own he had granted one year mercy period to Sita after which he would 
prefer to kill her. Arany kand sarg 56, shlok 24/ 25 may also be referred. 


Page 8 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


and Lakshaman have arrived at the sea shore, but how they will cross the vast sea! I am 
not scared of them, but we need to deliberate upon this today. I have been greatly 
benefited by your support in the past during the war of gods and demons.” 

Picking up from Ravan, Kumbhakarn expressed his view point, “You didn’t seek our 
counsel before abducting Sita. Your act of abducting her is sinful, and condemnable for 
a king of your stature. Before indulging in such act you should have thought the pros and 
cons of it. Stealing away someone’s wife deceitfully is unpardonable. I am surprised, 
how you survived so far the anger of Ram. Anyway, you are our king, and I have to 
support you. As birds look for a shortcut tunnel in the kronch 9 mountain, it would be 
advisable to observe the weak points of the enemy. I assure you that with my 
mountainous body, alone I would face them in the battle field. Ram would shoot one 
shaft, and before he would charge the second one, getting hold of him, I would drink his 
blood. I would kill all of them, and eat away in the battle field. You needn’t worry 
anymore about this; go and relax.” 

6-13 Compulsion of a curse (21 / 431) 

Mahaparsva was a renowned warrior and he advised Ravan, “You shouldn’t seethe in 
the fire of lust for Sita. You should forcibly drag her to your bed and enjoy her. If any 
situation arises, we would support Kumbhakarn and Indrajeet to ward off calamity. In 
presence of these two warriors, who would dare cause any harm upon us." 

Reacting to Mahaparsv’s advice, Ravan mentioned, “I suffer from a curse of Brahma. 
Punjikasthala, a celestial girl, was once on way to the abode of Brahma, and seeing me 
around, she moved cautiously. She couldn’t escape my eyes, and getting hold of her, I 
made her naked, and satisfied my lust forcibly. When Brahma saw her in pitiable 
condition of a smashed lotus, he came to know the details. He spoke to me, “Ravan, in 
future, if you force your passion upon any woman, your head will splinter into hundred 
pieces leading to your tragic end.” 

Ravan, subsequently, did his self appraisal, “My impulse and motion beat the power of 
sea and wind. Hundreds of shafts travel from my bow in a wink of eye. Unaware of my 
potential Ram is coming close to my range.” 

6-14 Vibhishan repeated his submission (22 / 453) 

Vibhishan couldn’t restrain himself, and spoke to Ravan, “Sita is a poisonous snake. Her 
bit is incurable. Before Ram comes over us, and we are sent to the death world, I would 
pray you to return Sita to him. None from the warriors group of Indrajeet, Kumbhakarn, 
Mahaparsv, Mahodar, Nikumbh, Kumbh, and Atikaya would be able to protect you 
against Ram. If gods like Varuna, Indr and Yam hide you in their lap, you won’t be able 
to escape the wrath of Ram.” 


Once, Katrikeya had made a tunnel with his spear in the impregnable kronch mountain, which facilitated later short cut travel of 
birds. (Refer Mahabharat shalya parv 46) 


Page 9 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Prahast interfered and expressed the invincibility of demons, to which Vibhishan again 
expressed his doubt, “Ram is a righteous person, and righteousness always wins. You 
people are biased and blind. I can’t escape from my responsibility of forewarning the 
demon king about the impending danger. Sita should be immediately surrendered to 
Ram.” 

6-15 Indrajeet ridiculed Vibhishan (14 / 467) 

Indrajeet was not convinced by the utterances of Vibhishan. He spoke, “In our family, 
this younger uncle is a coward. He is devoid of valiance, courage and boldness to face 
an enemy. I imprisoned Indr and brought him from sky to earth. Holding airavat elephant 
by its tusks, I had thrown that on earth. All the gods had deserted the battlefield when I 
had challenged them. In the background of such a valorous past, why are you afraid of 
these two simple humans." 

Vibhishan retorted Indrajeet, “Yet you are a child. Maturity is far away from you. You 
don’t have humility and humble words for others. Your this impudence would put all of us 
in peril. You haven’t experienced the strength of the shafts coming from the bow of Ram. 

I wish you could have realized the gravity of the situation and advised the demon king 
with a saner mind.” 

6-16 Departure of Vibhishan (26 / 493) 

Ravan didn’t take the words of Vibhishan in good taste. He rebuked him, “Although you 
from my family you act like an agent of enemy. It is true that members of closer family 
have been traitors. The rise of a given member of a family is hardly acceptable to other 
members. You also suffer from the same trait of jealousy. The old saying about 
elephants is quite relevant that out of jealousy, one of the family members misguides the 
other mighty one causing his fall in the trap of the hunter. There is one more example. 
After bath, an idiot elephant showers dust over his body, similarly company of a low 
minded is not worth keeping. Vibhishan! Today, if someone else would have been in 
your place, I would have killed him.” 

Vibhishan realized, “The demon king is bent upon to embrace the end.” Holding his 
mace, he immediately left the council accompanied by four other righteous demons. 
Standing in the sky, he addressed, “Ravan! You have humiliated me, but I don’t mind 
this because you are my elder brother, and I beg pardon for trying to reason you around 
righteousness. I still remind you that you have been trapped by sweet words of your 
courtiers who don’t dare to tell you the truth. I understand you have lost your sense of 
discriminating who is your enemy, and who is your well wisher. Being a close member of 
the same family, I dare forewarn you against the lurking end of the demons race. Alas! 
My words have met deaf ear. Now, with due humility, I am determined to desert this 
land." 


Page 10 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-17 Vibhishan arrived to sea shore (68 / 561) 

Deserting the company of Ravan, Vibhishan along with four other demons arrived 
through sky route on the northern sea shore where Ram had stayed with his monkey 
army. He was well dressed and had a radiant personality. Four other demons who had 
come with him were equally impressive in their physique. 

In the meanwhile, Sugirv with other monkeys saw those five demons coming towards 
them in the sky. Sugriv having a look at them, spoke to Hanuman and others, “These 
demons are coming to kill us.” Hearing Sugriv’s first hand reaction, the monkeys 
immediately picked up rocks and trees and asked Sugriv’s permission to kill those 
demons in sky itself. 

Vibhishan, paused for a while in the sky, and addressed the monkeys, “I am Vibhishan, 
younger brother of demon king Ravan. The devil demon king, killing righteous Jatayu, 
had abducted Sita deceitfully and continues to detain her in Lanka. I advised him several 
times to return Sita to Ram but he didn’t heed my words. Ignoring my advice, he treated 
me like a servant and humiliated me. Leaving my wife and children in Lanka, I have 
come to seek shelter with Ram. I request you to inform him, about my arrival as a 
protege to him.” 

Sugriv paced up to Ram and informed him about arrival of Vibhishan. He also mentioned 
to Ram, “We shouldn’t trust our enemy. Demons are known for the deceitful and 
transformed body. We don’t know who are they. In the name of shelter they will stay with 
us, and after studying all our strategic preparations, either they can attack on us, or 
convey the clue to the enemy camp. They can also instill dissension among our group of 
monkeys. Therefore, I advise to imprison them. Since he is brother of devil Ravan, I 
would prefer to kill him along with his four ministers." 

Hearing Sugriv, Ram spoke to Hanuman and other monkeys, “We have heard Sugriv. I 
request all of you to advise me on this issue.” 

As desired byRam, Angad mentioned, “We need to test them first, and thereafter, we 
should decide about the future course of action.” 

After Angad, Sarabh advised to depute a spy on them, and thereafter the decision could 
be taken. 

Jambvan advised, “Ravan is a great devil. The arrival of Vibhishan is always doubtful, 
because his arrival now, at this place does not have any relevance.” 

Maind picked up, and mentioned, “He is younger brother of Ravan. Let us first treat him 
with sweet words with a view to win his mind, enabling us to assess his intention." 

Lastly Hanuman submitted, “I don’t think there is any scope of putting spy on them. 
Normally spy is sent to a remote place, and since they are here with us, there is no use 
spying them. Moreover, they have disclosed their identity and intention, in that case what 


Page 11 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


else we expect from a spy. As regards the appropriateness of time and place of their 
arrival, I disagree to the earlier proposal. He mentioned, “Hearing about killing of Vali 
and subsequent coronation of Sugriv as a king, Vibhishan could also have arrived here 
with an aim to rise to the throne of Lanka when Ravan is killed. From all considerations, I 
propose to accept Vibhishan in our fold.” 

6-18 Ram granted interview to Vibhishan (39 / 600) 

Hearing Hanuman, Ram became very glad and expressed his view, “If someone has 
come as a friend, he is always acceptable even if he suffers from some shortcomings.” 
Reacting to Ram’s opinion, Sugriv quipped back, “Lord! I disregard whether he is evil 
minded or good minded; my point is that at this juncture of time, if he has deserted his 
brother, how is he going to be trustworthy to others!” Ram praised Sugriv’s imagination 
and mentioned, “There are two types of threats in the royal family, one from the outside 
neighbor, and the other from within the close family members. Vibhishan could have felt 
the threat of life from his own kith and kin. His surrender to us suggests that close family 
of the demon king suffers from inside threat, and if we accept him, we would be able to 
sow dissension among the demons. Besides, we may be benefited by the matured 
wisdom of Vibhishan.” 

Lakshaman, offering salutation to Ram said, “To me he seems to be an agent of Ravan, 
and he must be arrested.” Supporting Lakshaman’s view, Sugriv further added, 
“Vibhishan has come with an evil design, and after winning our confidence, he might 
make a lethal attack either on you, or Lakshaman or on me. I recommend killing of these 
five demons.” 

Ram wanted to clear the suspicion from the mind of Sugriv and he asserted 10 , “If I wish, I 
would kill all the demons, monsters, and yaksh using the tip of my one finger.” He quoted 
an exemplary story of a pigeon who offered his life for the comfort of the guest, although 
the guest was the hunter who had trapped earlier his consort. Despite this, male pigeon 
offered the guest his own meat to ensure his satisfaction. If a bird can maintain the spirit 
of hospitality, being a human being, I should not hesitate in accepting Vibhishan as a 
guest. There is another example from the sayings of the sage Kandu, son of Kanv, that 
even if an enemy solicits mercy, it must be granted, and he should not be assaulted. If 
someone ignores this practice of providing shelter to one who has surrendered, he is 
bound to destroy his own hard earned punya." 

Ram expressed his firmness, “I promise that if one seeks my protection * I 11 , saying ‘I know 
you only’ I keep him fear free from all the beings of this world. Therefore, whether he is 
Vibhishan or Ravan himself, I grant mercy, and he should be permitted to be with us.” 


10 This assertion is assertion of Ram's supreme divinity, WT win I tint bHftsf 

I 6-18-23. One may refer shlok 6-6-17 / 18, where Ravan expresses his own impression about the divinity of Ram that 
he is capable of either crossing the ocean, bridging it or drying up. 

11 ymk-i d=ii j 4iPi *r qra?r l w 5 #‘p , KiT gri ¥t I 16-18-33 


Page 12 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Praising Ram for his magnanimity, Sugriv readily accepted his command and said, 
“When I reflect a little upon Vibhishan, I found him a clear hearted person. He must be 
initiated in our group as one of us, and shall receive warmth of friendship from all of us.” 

Appreciating free consent of Sugriv, Ram stepped forward to welcome Vibhishan, as if 
Indr came forward to receive garud. 

6-19 Vibhishan’s coronation (41 / 641) 

Getting permission of Ram, Vibhishan landed with his four friends, and prostrating over 
the feet of Ram, spoke to him, “I am Vibhishan, younger brother of Ravan. O, Protector 
of all the beings! Being humiliated by Ravan, I have come seeking refuge in you. 12 ." 

With his sweet words, Ram encouraged Vibhishan. Continuing his conversation, he 
looked affectionately at him, and enquired about the strength of the demons. Describing 
in detail Vibhishan mentioned to Ram, “Ravan has a boon from Brahma that he can’t be 
killed by any of nag, gandharv, and birds. Younger to Ravan, and elder to me is 
Kumbhakarn, who is mighty and valorous like Indr. Indrajeet, son of Ravan, has pleased 
fire god, and has been blessed to fight with the enemy keeping himself invisible. He uses 
gloves of snake’s skin, and is protected by an impregnable shield over his body. Army 
chiefs of Ravan are Prahast, Mahodar, Mahaparsv, and Akampan. Prahast is so mighty 
that while fighting at Kailas he had defeated Manibhadr, the army chief of Kuber. The 
demons in Lanka eat meat and drink blood. Their total number is more than ten crore 13 
thousand, i.e., one hundred billion.” 

Hearing the details from Vibhishan, Ram mentioned, “I would eliminate Prahast, Ravan 
with his sons, and would enthrone you as king of Lanka. He won’t be spared even if he 
hides himself in the lap of Brahma. I swear in the name of my three brothers that without 
killing Ravan and his supporters I won’t enter in Ayodhya.” 

Responding to Ram, Vibhishan assured him full support, and mentioned that if need be 
he would fight for his cause splitting through the demons’ army in Lanka. Pleased by his 
pledge, Ram embraced him, and asked Lakshaman to arrange for coronation of 
Vibhishan as king of demons. Lakshaman, getting sea water, performed the coronation 
of Vibhishan in presence of monkeys who produced uproarious sound of joy to greet 
him as demons king. 

Hanuman and Sugriv, while chatting with Vibhishan enquired how to cross the vast sea. 
Vibhishan advised, “Sea has gained the vast shape by the efforts of the great emperor 
Sagar, an illustrious king of Ram’s dynasty. Therefore Ram should pray sea to give him 
way.” When Sugriv conveyed Vibhishan’s advice to Ram, he consented to it, and asked 
Sigriv to think about this. Lakshaman and Sugriv pondering over it, advised Ram to go 


12 y<%1Hi STTOT 5RW TTcTS I 6-19-4 

13 

One crore ( ) is equal to ten million 


Page 13 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


by the advice of Vibhishan without any further delay. Soon Ram, seating over a kush 
mat commenced his prayer to sea. 

6-20 Ravan’s spy Shuk (34/ 675) 

Shardul was one of the spies of the demon king Ravan. He happened to see the sea like 
army of monkeys and bears. He rushed to Ravan and informed him, “Ten yojan of land 
on the northern sea shore has been fully occupied by the monkey army lead by Sugriv. 
Two sons of Dasarth, Ram and Lakshaman have impressive personality and look like 
great warriors. My advice is either to return Sita or send spies to take precise stalk of 
their strategy. Alternatively, the spies should try to cause dissension and win over Sugriv 
to your side." 

Ravan called one of the learned spies, Shuk and asked him to go to Sugriv and convey 
him his message in sweet words, “O king of monkeys, Sugriv! If I haven’t caused any 
good to you, it is sure I have done any harm also. By abducting Sita, I never did any 
harm to you. Please go back to Kishkindha, because none of the monkeys would be 
able to cross the vast sea. Lanka is inaccessible to gods and gandharv and what to talk 
of monkeys." 

Shuk, in the guise of a parrot, crossed the sea and coming close to Sugriv repeated the 
message of Ravan to him from the sky itself. Monkeys also heard him, and they 
gathered at a place, and intended to catch him to tear his wings apart. Soon they jumped 
in the sky, and catching hold of him, began tearing his wings. He cried aloud attracting 
the attention of Ram, and pleaded, “I am a messenger of Ravan, and a messenger’s 
killing is a sin.” On Ram’s interference he was liberated. While staying in sky again, he 
requested Sugriv for his reply to the demon king Ravan. 

Sugriv asked Shuk to convey to Ravan, “By killing aged Jatayu he considers himself a 
great warrior. If he was confident of his strength, why didn’t he wait to face Ram and 
Lakshaman. He is neither my friend, nor my well wisher, and never deserves any 
compassion. Like Vali his death is imminent. Soon we will storm over Lanka and destroy 
the entire city with Ravan and his supporters. Against Ram, none of the gods including 
Indr, and Mahadev would never come to his rescue. Being a sinner, he didn’t realize the 
divinity of Ram, who is beyond the imagination all the gods ( wrw jsw 

i 1 6-20-28).” 

Angad interfered and spoke, “He is not a messenger, rather he is a spy, and a spy when 
caught red handed deserves death punishment. By standing in the sky he has observed 
the strategic formations of our army, and he would report it to the enemy." Hearing 
Angad, monkeys once again caught him and dragged him down over ground. While 
Shuk was being mercilessly tortured by the monkeys, he again cried to seek Ram’s 
favor. Ram advised them to release Shuk as he had visited the place as a messenger 
and not as a spy. 


Page 14 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-21 Ram in wrath over sea (35 / 710) 

Praying sea, Ram had lied over kush mat. His mighty right arm was his pillow. Before 
coming to exile, his arms used to be decorated with precious jewels and sandal paste. 
Now on sea shore the same arm was lying bare on ground. Concentrating to please sea, 
the master of all the rivers, Ram spent three nights in complete silence. Lastly, he spoke 
to Lakshaman, “Peace, mercy, simplicity, and sweet words are the jewels of good 
persons. But devils taking these traits as weaknesses, continues to be in a conceited 
state. Those who assail good or bad alike, and tackle with cruelty others irrespective of 
any consideration, are honoured in society. Despite my continued prayer sea didn’t 
bother to show up, and therefore, without delay I must use the force. Conciliation does 
not work with the devils. Bring my bow and arrow.” 

Getting his bow and arrows, Ram shot a fiery shaft causing great chaos in the sea. The 
marine creatures were threatened with their ultimate end. The sea tides had a whirling 
twist. When he was to shoot another arrow, Lakshaman interfered, and requested him 
for a restraint seeking some other alternative than to take the disastrous step. Sages 
and gods also cried in the sky and solicited restraint from Ram. 

6-22 Bridge across sea (89 / 799) 

Angry Ram couldn’t restrain himself, and thought aloud, “My arrow will now dry up this 
inert sea, facilitating walking of monkeys to Lanka. The store of gems, creatures, and 
unfathomable water will soon be converted into vast desert of dry sand.” Thereafter, he 
drew a brilliant shaft, and the moment he commenced charging that as brahmashtr , gw 
indications of incidence of great chaos in the universe became visible. Sun became 
oblique to his route, and though he was in sky, there was darkness all around. 
Mountains began shaking, sea water was on flames, and marine creatures felt imminent 
end of their life. 

Lo and behold! Sea in person appeared over water surface. His complexion was bluish, 
and he was wrapped in red silk robe with red flower garland around his neck. He had 
varieties of jewels over various organs, and excellent gold crown over his head. Similar 
to kaustabh tr^t, his pearl garland had a brilliant gem shining over his chest. The head 
crown had a garland of multi coloured flowers. Surrounded by rivers, manifested in 
persons, he came to Ram and submitted, “Earth, wind, sky, and fire have their inherent 
characteristics. If they quit those characteristics there would be a chaos in the creation 
and would be devoid of any discipline. While maintaining due honour to this natural 
discipline, I would devise a way out to take across safely the entire monkey army.” 

Ram asked him to advise, “His shaft loaded on the string would never go in vain without 
hitting any target. Now sea has to indicate the appropriate target for this.” 

Sea submitted, “On my north, in the country of Drumkulya ), there reside dreadful 
people who not only take undue advantage of my water rather they torture the creatures 
unjustly. It is better to target them.” As advised, Ram shot his arrow which dried up the 


Page 15 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


said land of all rivers and lakes, and killed the deadly people. Instead a deep well full of 
sea water was created. Ram also blessed the land to possess varieties of medicinal 
herbal plants for the well being of the people of other countries. Abundance of milk and 
its products shall be available from this land. He called the land by the name Marukantar 
(VcbMi'J . It would be free of diseases and shall always be permeated with the sweet 
herbal fragrance. 

Having achieved his objective, sea spoke to Ram, “Nal is with you. His father has 
blessed him with a great art of crafting any structure. He is capable of raising a bridge 
across vast sea, and I would provide due support to the bridge.”, and saying thus, sea 
disappeared. 

Nal, rising up, paid his respect to Ram, and gladly accepted the assignment. He further 
spoke, “Shear out of fear, sea had appeared and disclosed the clue. He could have also 
appeared earlier as a mark of obligation of the king Sagar. But in this world the language 
of punishment is more understandable than the spirit of conciliation." 

Disclosing about his genesis he mentioned, “My mother was blessed on Mandarachal by 
viswakarma (the celestial architect, fewtf ), and he assured her that she will get a son of 
his capability. Thus I am a child of viswakarma produced from his mental resolve. 
Reminded by sea, I could recollect my skill. Unless asked for, I was not able to speak 
out on my own about my skill. Let us begin the bridge work today itself." 

On command of Ram, the monkeys collected huge rock masses and large timber logs of 
sal, aswkarn, dhav, bamboo, kutaj, arjun, tal, tilak, tinish, bel, chitvan, kaner, mango, 
ashok from the nearby forest. Using rocks and logs, the bridge construction commenced, 
and on the first day, 14 yojan length was completed ( 6 - 22 - 68 ). The subsequent lengths 
completed on the following days were : 2 nd day 20 yojan , 3 rd day 21 yojan, 4 th day 22 
yojan , and 5 th day 23 yojan. The south side end of the completed 100 yojan bridge was 
near suvel mountain of Lanka. 10 yojan wide and 100 yojan long bridge became an 
object of attraction for the celestial beings. Gathering in the sky, they praised the tough 
and impossible work completed by Nal with the assistance of ten billion monkeys (6-22- 
78). The appearance of the bridge was like a shadow bridge (*qTWT / SFTTTT ) (6-22-74) 
over the sea. 

With a view to protect the bridge against the possible danger of the demons, Vibhishan, 
holding mace in his hand, stood guard on the Lanka end itself. On the initiative of Sugriv, 
Ram climbed the shoulder of Hanuman, and Lakshaman climbed over the shoulder of 
Angad. Lead by Ram and Lakshaman, the monkeys’ army moved with a great uproar 
subduing the sound of tides of the sea. Some of the monkeys swam along the bridge, 
while others flew over it, and gradually enjoying the trekking, they arrived at the southern 
sea shore. Finding abundance of water, fruits and roots Sugriv preferred to pitch the 
camp on sea shore itself. 

Seeing miraculous deed of bridging the sea, gods along with charan wm, siddh fag and 
sages gathered near Ram. They offered their respectful worship to Ram with sea water. 


Page 16 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Greeting him with recitation of his glory, they wished his victory over the enemy as well 
as sought his continued compassion over the people of earth for their prosperity. 

6-23 Bad omens over Lanka (16 / 815) 

Ram noticed several bad omens which were indicative of loss of lives of demons and 
monkeys. They suggested large scale carnage and destruction. He enumerated them, 
“Wind is laden with dust, mountains keep on shaking, and trees are falling. Black clouds 
pour blood mixed drops. The evening has red reflections, and torch of fires drop from 
sun. Moon has reduced light and has got mix of black and red rays indicative of 
impending cataclysm of the world. Sun has blue spots as well as red and short circles 
around it. The sky is full of crows, vultures and hawks. We need to make preparations 
for safety of our army by putting them in several contingents at different places where 
adequate water and fruits are available . He also advised to attack over Lanka at the 
earliest.” 

6-24 Sugirva’s preparations and Shuk reporting to Ravan (44 / 859) 

Sugriv arranged the stay of the monkeys in a well defined framework. He was seen as if 
a full autumn moon shone amidst brilliant stars. The monkeys’ multitude was oceanic in 
appearance, and earth seemed to quake with their gathering. Hearing the sound of 
musical instruments in Lanka, monkeys also produced counter sound as uproarious as 
far spread thunder of the clouds. 

When Ram had a look at Lanka, he was seized with sorrow of Sita who was detained 
inside the city. He felt as if rohini 14 was afflicted by mars. City of Lanka was marvelous 
creation of viswakarma. The white seven storied mansions draw a distinct line in the sky 
which was earlier occupied by the colossal lotus feet 15 of lord Vishnu (6-24-10). The cool 
breeze coming from the city has fragrance of flowers. We hear the chirping of birds in 
the green groves evenly spread over the landmass. These groves are comparable to 
chaitrarath of kuber’s garden. 

Ram inspected the strategic formation of the army which was given the shape of human 
body (6-24-14). Nal and Angad occupied the place of heart. Rishabh occupied the right 
arm, and Gandhamadan was on the left arm. Ram and Lakshaman themselves were in 
the location of head, whereas Jambvan, Sushen, and Vegdarshi occupied the abdomen. 
Sugriv himself protected the back side. 

When the formations took shape, the demons messenger 16 Shuk who was arrested by 
the monkeys was released (6-24-23). Scared to his core, Shuk arrived to the demon’s 


14 In valmiki ramayan examples of moon with star of rohini, chitra and affliction with mars are noteworthy. This suggests that there 
exists correlation of happenings over earth with the position of stars and planets in sky. 

15 Another noteworthy favorite example is of trivikram bhagwan which is often found repeated in valmiki ramayan. 

16 Shuk was arrested on the northern sea shore, and he was under arrest until strategic shifting of the monkeys' army was 
completed from northern to the southern sea shore. 


Page 17 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


king, Ravan. Seeing him Ravan enquired, “Your two wings appear as if they have been 
clipped. Have they been torn away by the monkeys?” 

Shuk informed, “I was trapped by the angry monkeys who didn’t hear your message, and 
they tore my wings away. Crossing the brackish vast sea, the killer of Viradh, Khar and 
Kabandha has arrived at our threshold with his huge monkey army. Now it seems we are 
left with two options. Either return Sita or fight face to face with him.” 

Reacting to Shuk’s advice Ravan mentioned, “I will show the ascetics my skill of archery. 
My bow is a vina (guitar) for me. The arrows produce the musical notes out of it. The 
resonating string generates the waves of musical rhythm, and the cry of dying warriors is 
the accompanying vocal song. The sound of arrows leaving the string is like rhythmic 
clapping. The crowd of enemy makes the stage of presentation. When my elder brother 
Kuber, Indr and Varun can’t face my fiery shafts, I am surprised, how these ascetics will 
face them!” 

6-25 Ravan’s spy Shuk and Saran (33 / 892) 

When Ram arrived with the huge monkey army on the southern shore, Ravan sent his 
two spies to assess the strength of the enemy. He also wanted to know, “what sort of 
weapons Ram has got in his possession. What is the exact number of monkeys, and 
who is the chief of army?” 

Both the spies, disguised as monkeys moved across the enemy’s camp but were not 
able to assess the exact number of monkeys. While they felt puzzled, they caught the 
imagination of Vibhishan. Arresting them, he brought them to Ram and mentioned, 
“These two spies, Shuk and Saran are sent by Ravan to study and report to him our 
strength and weaknesses.” 

Ram spoke to them, “If you have visited our side to your satisfaction, you are free to go 
back to your master. If you are still half way you are free to roam around here and collect 
the information you wish to report to your master. Both of you don’t possess any 
weapons therefore we will not harm you at all.” 

When they were about to leave, Ram asked them to convey to Ravan, “You must now 
demonstrate your strength to us. We are here to liberate Sita and tomorrow morning we 
will lay a siege around Lanka.” 

Two spies, wishing loudly ‘victory to Ram, and let he live long’ came back to Ravan and 
spoke to him, “Our presence was detected by Vibhishan, but Ram freed us without 
causing any harm. Besides other valiant monkeys and bears, Ram, Lakshaman, Sugriv 
and Vibhishan are the back bone of the army. Four of them are invincible, and let alone 
the other three, Ram himself is confident of defeating us. The warrior monkeys are 
excited to begin the battle and we think that you won’t be benefited by running into 
combat with them. It would be better if conciliation is attempted, and Sita is returned 
back.” 


Page 18 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-26 Ravan took a look at army chiefs of monkeys (47 / 939) 

Hearing the spies report, Ravan mentioned to them, “If gods, gandharv and demons 
together come to fight, I will never return Sita. It seems, being greatly teased by 
monkeys, you are scared of them, and advise me to return Sita. I don’t care about my 
enemies, since I had always been invincible in the battle field.” 

Getting angry over them, he took them to the topmost terrace of the mansions to have a 
clear view of the army of monkeys. When he took a look at them, he found the entire 
space from sea shore to Lanka including all forests and mountains, occupied by 
monkeys. He enquired from Saran, “Introduce me who are chiefs of the different 
contingents, and who is the chief of chiefs.” 

Saran mentioned, “(i) Surrounded by one hundred thousand monkeys, is Neel, and he 
leads the army, (ii) The other one, who frequently bangs his tail over ground, and is 
creating terrifying sound, is Angad; he is son of Vali, and is prince of Kishkindha. It is he, 
whose brain worked 17 for securing Hanuman’s success in his mission in locating Sita (6- 
26-19). (iii) Standing behind Angad is Nal who built the bridge. He is master of eight 
hundred thousand plus hundred million hundred i.e., a slightly over ten billion of mighty 
monkeys. (iv)The silver white complexioned is Shwet who keeps on cheering up the 
monkeys, (v) There is a mountain range called Sanrochan, near Gomati river. Kumud 
belongs to that region and is accompanied by the monkeys from there, (vi) The one 
having red, yellow, and grey hair over his body is Chanda and has capacity to lead 
millions of monkeys, (vii) The monkey who has got long hair over his neck and is of 
yellowish brown complexion, is Rambh, and he keeps roaming in the forest of vindhya, 
krishngiri, sahya and sudarshan. He is looking to Lanka as if he would burn the city and 
has over millions of monkeys with him. (viii) The monkey who is time and again yawning 
and expanding his ears is Sharabh. He is from Salveya mountain, and although he leads 
one hundred forty thousand monkeys called vihar 18 , he is excited to fight alone, (ix) One 
who looks like dark cloud and is surrounded by fifty hundred thousand monkeys is 
Panas and he hails from Pariyatr mountain, (x) One who has come from Durdar 
mountain, and drinks water of Vena river, is Vinat. He has sixty hundred thousand 
monkeys with him who are called Krodhan and keeps defying you for combat, (xi) 
Having red complexion, looking like meru mountain is Gavay, and he is served by 
seventy hundred thousand monkeys. 

6-27 Saran continued introducing monkey chiefs (48 / 987) 

(xii) This monkey who has long multicolor and shining hair over his tail is Har. His 
thousands of followers are holding trees to smash Lanka, (xiii) The mighty bear is 
Dhumr, who stays at rikshvan mountain and drinks water of Narmada river. He is 


17 TFW T TT trfcfS ^ |^IT TTWPPTT I WTKT FfH'-l'JII | | 6-26-19 

18 This is indicative of monkeys coming from Bihar (present state of India). 


Page 19 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


surrounded by dark bears from all regions, (xiv) Younger brother of Dhumr is Jambvan 
whose valor is superior to the former. He is learnt to have helped Indr during battle of 
gods and demons. He is well composed and always honours his elders and ministers, 
(xv) One who often leaps up and stands erect is Dambh and has got a large contingent 
of monkeys. He is devotee of thousand-eyed Indr and has augmented several times 
Indr with his monkey army, (xvi) The other monkey is Samanadan and is capable of 
touching mountains located at a distance of one yojan from his place. He is said to be 
the grandfather of monkeys. He had once challenged Indr for combat, and had emerged 
victorious, (xvii) In order to help gods against demons, fire god gave birth to the monkey 
called Krathan from a gandharv mother. He regularly attends Kuber, and stays on the 
same mountain over which your brother Kuber stays enjoying the shade of the rose- 
berry tree. Krathan never praises himself from his own mouth, (xviii) Look at the 
place where the cloud of dust. There stands Pramathi famous for his prevalence over 
elephants. He roams around river ganga, and stays over Ushirbeej mountain. He also 
frequently moves on mandrachal. (xix) The black faced long tailed monkey is Gavaksh 
and is supported by his over ten millions monkeys of the same origin, (xx) The other 
radiant monkey is Kesari who stays at Meru circumscribed daily by sun. The trees over 
Meru is said to bear fruits in all seasons. This mountain is known for its special type of 
honey, (xxi) Savarnimeru is the gem of sixty thousand golden mountains as you are gem 
of the demons. The monkeys staying over this mountain are lead by Shatabali who is a 
devotee of sun god. The monkeys with him have grey, copper red, yellow and white 
faces, (xxii) There are innumerable mighty and tall monkeys from Vindhya who are here 
to engage you in combat. 

6-28 Further introduction by Shuk (42 / 1029) 

On completion of introduction about monkeys by Saran, further introduction was picked 
by Shuk. He mentioned, “(i) The monkeys tall like sal trees of the Himalayas are over 
two hundred million in number. They stay in Kishkindha and are secretary to Sugriv. 
They are capable of transforming to the guise of their wishes, (ii) Two monkeys having 
physique like gods are Dwvid and Maind. By the grace of Brahma, they had been 
benefited with the draught of nectar, (iii) The monkey standing alone like an elephant is 
Hanuman who had earlier visited Lanka and met Sita. He is elder son of Kesari and is 
capable of stirring the sea alone. He can disguise himself in any form, and moves as fast 
as the mighty wind. Once, when he was a child, leapt over three thousand yojan in the 
sky towards sun. He wanted to grab the sun whom he mistook as a delicious fruit. Since 
he couldn’t reach sun, he fell over Udaigiri mountain and as a result his chin was twisted. 

I have collected legends about him from reliable sources. His potential is unfathomable, 
and he enflamed the fire god to burn Lanka to ashes, who had been earlier subservient 
to you. (iv) By the side of Hnauman, is lotus eyed Ram who has bluish in complexion. He 
is a righteous person, knows veda , has got possession of brhamastr, and is expert in 
archery and warfare. His shafts can pierce through sky, and split through earth. His 
anger is like death, and valour is that of Indr. He is ready for a combat with you whose 
wife Sita you had abducted from Janasthan. (v) On his right is Lakshaman, his brother. 
He is of shining complexion and has got black curly hair. He is hall mark in class of 


Page 20 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


warriors. He is endowed with invincible valour. He is soul of Ram and remains on his 
right, (vi) On the left of Ram is Vibhishan who had already been anointed king of Lanka 
by Ram. (vii) The brilliant mountain standing out among monkeys is king Sugriv. His 
headquarter is cave fort of Kishkindha. Due to rugged mountains entry to Kishkindha is 
tough. The golden garland made of hundred lakshmi, around his neck is a gift of Ram to 
him after killing Vali. Ram’s other gifts to him are Tara, and kingdom of Kishkindha.” 

Shuk explained further the unit of count. 

• 1 koti = 100 lakhs 

• 1 shanku (or Neel) = 100, 000 koti 

• 1 mahashanku = 100, 000 shanku 

• 1 vrind = 100, 000 mahashanku 

• 1 mahavrind = 100, 000 vrind 

• 1 padm = 100, 000 mahavrind 

• 1 mahapadm = 100, 000 padm 

• 1 kharv = 100, 000 mahapadm 

• 1 mahakharv = 100, 000 kharv 

• 1 samudr = 1000 mahakharv 

• 1 ogh = 100, 000 samudr 

• 1 mahogh = 100, 000 ogh 

Vibhishan and Sugriv challenge you with army having strength of thousand koti, 
thousand mahashanku, hundred vrind, thousand mahavrind, hundred padm, thousand 
mahapadm, hundred kharv, hundred samudr, hundred mahogh, and sumudra like koti 
mahogh. 

Shuk further pointed out, “O, King! The army of monkeys is like brilliant planets. You 
need to make such a preparation that you are not humiliated by them." 

6-29 Ravan rebuked Shuk and Saran (29 / 1058) 

Having a glance of the entire army and introduction about the important ones, Ravan 
spoke to his spies, “The king is capable of mercy as well as punishment. Those who 
work for the king and their source of earning is from the king, should never speak 
unsolicited things to the king. Is it proper that both of you sang the glory of the enemy 
who is now on the threshold of Lanka. Both of you have failed to maintain the decorum 
of royal court. Fools! Having advisers like if I have saved this state, this is my credit. 


Page 21 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Recalling your past obligations I spare your life. Both of you, get out of my kingdom, and 
never show your face to me. They left paying due respect to him. 

Subsequently, Ravan spoke to Mahodara, for calling the trustworthy royal spies. Soon 
the spies appeared with folded hands before Ravan. He asked them, “Go and collect the 
relevant information from the enemy’s camp. How they sleep, what they eat, and what is 
their immediate action plan?” Lead by Shardul, a group of spies came to the Suvel 
mountain camp of Ram, Lakshaman, Sugriv and Vibhishan. Being detected by 
Vibhishan, they were arrested, and were severely tortured by the monkeys. When 
compassionate Ram helped their release, they rushed back to Ravan. 

6-30 Shardul’s information to Ravan (35 / 1093) 

Coming to Ravan, Shardul informed that the enemy is camping near suvel mountain. 
When Ravan saw his pale face, he wanted to know whether he was captured and 
tortured by them. Shardul confirmed, “It is difficult to get into their camp. It is heavily 
protected from all sides. The layout of the army is on the pattern of garud. When I 
entered their camp, the demons of Vibhishan detected my presence. I was detained by 
them, and monkeys began thrashing me. At the same time, I was taken around inside 
the camp mentioning my fault of entering the camp stealthily. Suddenly, Ram interfered 
and he saved my life. Bridging sea with rocks they have arrived here. When I was 
released, they had marched towards the fort to lay siege, and attack over the city. Before 
they come over us, either you return Sita to them, or face them in the battle field.” 

Pondering over Shardul’s statement, Ravan spoke to him, “I would never return Sita 
even if all the gods and demons come fighting to me.” Saying this he enquired more 
information about the chiefs among the monkeys. Shardul continued with the desired 
information, “I will tell you one by one. The son of Riksharaja (Sugriv) is invincible in 
combat. Jambvan is a mighty bear, and he is son of Gadgad. There is one more son of 
Gadgad, and that is Dhumr. There is a monkey called Kesari, and he is son of 
Brihaspati, preceptor of Indr. Hanuman, son of Kesari had been to Lanka who caused 
immense damage to the city. He is mental son of vayu also. Sushen is son of Dharm, 
and Dadhimukh is son of Chandrama. Sumukh, Durmukh, and Vegdarshi are children of 
Mrityu. They are really manifestation of death. Neel is son of Agni. Angad is grandson of 
Indr. Dwid and Maind are sons of Ashwini kumar. Gaj, Gavaksh, Gavay, Sharabh, and 
Gandhmadan are five sons of Yamraj. Shwet and Jyotirmukh are mental sons of Surya. 
The son of Varun is known as Hemkut. Nal is son of Viswakarma, and Vasu’s son is 
Durdhar. The monkeys having hereditary relation with gods are one hundred million in 
number. There are other countless monkeys also, and it is impossible to describe about 
them. 

Shardul mentioned specially about Ram and Lakshaman, “Ram is full of righteousness 
and is a mighty and formidable young warrior. It was he who killed Khar, Dushan, 
Trishira, Viradh and Kabandh. His potential is infinite and it is difficult to describe them in 
detail. His younger brother, Lakshaman looks like king of elephants, and even Indr may 
not be able to face his shafts in the battlefield.” 


Page 22 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-31 Sita in dilemma (45 / 1138) 

Having heard about the details of the enemy from the spies, Ravan was gripped with 
anxiety. He immediately called the meeting of his close associates and after discussing 
with them about the future action plan left for his palace. Subsequently, he called 
Viddyujjihva, a demon known for show of sorcery. He asked him to produce by sorcery 
cut head of Ram, and his bow and arrows. As desired by Ravan, the demon 
Viddyujjihva produced what he wanted. Impressed by his presentation, Ravan left with 
him for pramadavan to see Sita. Sita was sitting under a ashok tree, deeply immersed in 
the memory of Ram. Her eyes had a downward gaze. When Ravan arrived near her, 
reciting his name he spoke to her, “Ram had camped here on sea shore. Demons army 
lead by Prahast attacked over them while they were sleeping. Hanuman, Angad, Sugriv, 
and others were killed, and Ram was also beheaded by a sword. Vibhishan has been 
arrested while Lakshaman had run away with a few monkeys. Sita, You have lost your 
base now, and you have no option left except to accept me." 

Ravan, then sent for Viddyujjihva to show Sita the head of Ram so that she can have the 
last glimpse of him. On the behest of Ravan, Viddyujjihva presented the head of Ram 
made through sorcery. Ravan introduced her with the bow and arrow of Ram which 
Viddyujjihva had also prepared. Having done that Ravan asked Sita, “Now accept me.” 

6-32 Wailing Sita (44 / 1182) 

When Sita had a look of the head of Ram, she believed it to be the true one, and began 
weeping bitterly. She cursed Kaikeyi for the tragic end of her husband. She fell trembling 
unconscious over the ground. When her fit was over, she again had a look over the head 
and cried, “You have attained the status of a mighty warrior, but I am a widow now. You 
were knowledgeable in the statecraft, and how you have been deceived by the demons. 
Like a chaste woman you are now lying over the ground. I have been worshipping your 
bow with flowers and sandal and today it is lying before me unattended. Since marriage 
we stayed together for a long period, and today you have left leaving this ill fated to 
demons’ disposal. Three of us came to forest together, and now Lakshaman would go 
back alone to inform Kausalya. Hearing the heart rending news, how she will keep her 
life. After crossing the vast sea you emerged victorious, but your death while sleeping is 
like drowning in the ditch of the size of a cow hoof. ” 

While Sita was crying for her ill fate, a messenger came to inform Ravan about an 
emergency call from army chief Prahast. When Ravan left to attend the meeting, both 
the items of the magic show disappeared. Ravan was engaged in making necessary 
arrangements for the ensuing battle. He advised to announce in the city asking the 
warriors to assemble immediately at the designated place. 

6-33 Sita consoled (38 / 1220) 

Sarama was a noble demoness. She came to console Sita who was grieved on a false 
news. She mentioned, “I am a guard deputed by Ravan, but I love you like my 


Page 23 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


affectionate friend. I have heard everything what Ravan had told you. When he left I 
followed him and have come back with firm news that war is imminent with Ram. Ram is 
safely camping on the southern sea shore. Whatever he showed you were product of 
sorcery. You discard the scene which you carry in your mind. Get up, get rid of the grief, 
alas! How you have soiled you body in dust grieving for Ram. You are lucky, goddess 
Lakshami would be soon at your service. I am sure very soon, Ram will himself unlock 
the single mat of your hair.” 

While she was consoling Sita, she heard the trumpet of declaration of war. She drew 
Sita’s attention to it and convinced her that she had truly reported the precise status of 
the developments taking place, “When Ram crossed the vast sea, the demon king has 
lost the balance, and now he can’t avoid the impending war. You must have noticed how 
agitated he left this place.” 

She reported to Sita, “This trumpet has caused urgent preparation of chariots, cavalry 
and infantry for the war. You can see how they the demons army have began streaming 
towards the strategic locations.” 

6-34 Sarma posted Sita with truth (28 / 1248) 

Sarma further tried to win her confidence and mentioned, “If you prefer, I would fly in 
disguise to Ram and convey your well being to him." Sita, welcome her proposal and 
praised her capability, but she requested her not to do that. She sought her assistance in 
collecting information about what Ravan was thinking and doing at that time. 

Hearing Sita’s request, Sarma went out to collect the latest news about Ravan. She went 
to the Ravan’s palace and came back with the present status. On her return, she could 
realize that Sita was direct incarnation of goddess Lakshami who was sitting without 
lotus in her hands (6-34-16, tt aaw ^st i <JWTFi wra fenrc; l l ) 

When she came near Sita, she embraced her, and gave a seat close to herself. 
Thereafter, she enquired in sweet words about the updates. Sarama narrated what she 
had learnt, “Ravan’s mother, and an elder minister had tried to reason round him to 
return Sita immediately with utmost honor. They pleaded that Ram’s divinity is confirmed 
form the happenings of Janasthan when he alone eliminated the demons from there. 
Later, arrival of Hanuman who met Sita, killed several demons, burnt Lanka, and left 
unhurt, further confirm that without supreme 19 divinity these incidents were not feasible. 
These events are sure signals of his divinity. But that demon is destined to die, and 
therefore he has ignored their advice.” 

She pointed out to Sita the uproarious sound of conch coming from the monkeys’ camp. 
Hearing that sound the demons had become afraid of the impending calamity over 
Lanka. 


19 6-34-22, ?T 1 ^ ^ TOW 3^ 4j 8 gfa I I 


Page 24 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-35 Malyavan’s attempt to reason with Ravan (37 / 1285) 

Ram had made attack over Lanka. The sound of conch and uproars of monkeys had 
been heart in Lanka as a heart rending sound. Ravan, sitting in the meeting of the war 
council mentioned sarastically, “I have learnt from you about Ram’s bridging the sea, 
coming over in Lanka, and now I hear the uproarious challenge of combat. There is no 
doubt that he is a great warrior, and you people are still greater to him in valour that in 
such a critical juncture you keep watching each other’s face.” 

Malyavan was maternal grandfather of Ravan. He was also in the meeting. He spoke to 
Ravan, “The wise king always act according to the situation. If he finds the enemy is 
equal or stronger, he adopts the policy of conciliation. If he finds the enemy weaker then 
only he makes the attack or counters the attack as the situation may be. I therefore 
advise to adopt the policy of conciliation with Ram.” 

Supporting his points further he quoted, “Brahma has created gods and demons. Gods 
follow the path of righteousness whereas demons take the course of sinful deeds. In 
satyug the righteousness prevails upon the sinful deeds, where as in kaliyug the reverse 
is the case. Sages have been continuing their penance and oblations to enhance the 
potential of righteousness. By their efforts, gods have gathered strength, and the 
present scene is the manifestation of gods righteousness against your sinful act. Your 
boon have made you safe against gods, gandharv and yksha but not against humans 
and monkeys. The present attack is clear indication of this.” 

He continued his persuasion to desist Ravan from combat, and referred to several bad 
omens which suggest impending calamity over demons: (i) clouds shower warm blood 
mixed with water over the city, (ii) horses and elephants shed tears, (iii) the quarters and 
horizon has become hazy with dust, (iv) meat eater animals, vultures, and jackals gather 
in group in groves, (v) in dream black women show their yellow teeth and stealing away 
household stuff they laugh with contempt, (vi) the oblation stuff is polluted by dogs, (vii) 
cows beget asses, and mongooses begets rats, (viii) the unheard co-habitation of tigers 
with cats, dogs with boars, and kinnar with demons and humans have become 
prevalent, (ix) pigeons with white wings and red claws roam freely in Lanka, (x) the 
house hold birds (parrot and myna) engage with wild birds and fall defeated over ground, 
(xi) animals and birds lament loudly raising their moth towards sun, (xii) in dream, death 
in the form of terrifying black shaven head humans stare over our mansions. 

Finally, he advised Ravan, “I am sure Vishnu has incarnated 20 as Ram (6-35-35) who 
has performed miraculous deeds of bridging the sea. This sort of performance is beyond 
the imagination of an ordinary human being. It is therefore essential that you should 
discard enmity with him, and adopt the policy of truce to enable the demons enjoy a 
safe, happy and longer living.” 


I wi fsfepr § i i 6-35-35 


Page 25 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-36 Malyavan condemned (22 / 1307) 

Ravan was extremely angry to hear Malyavan’s advice. He mentioned, “I don’t see 
anything special in Ram. Banished by his father, he has made friendship with monkeys 
and crossed the sea. He is an ordinary human being. Taking the side of the enemy you 
uttered unpardonable words against the crowned and ruling king of Lanka. Either you 
have been prompted by the enemy or you are their agents and have shifted your loyalty 
to them. Soon you will see, this is my promise, that along with all the monkeys I would 
send Ram to the death world.” 

Malyavan maintained complete silence, and subsequently wishing him to be victorious 
left the council for home. Later, Ravan made the security arrangements of the city, and 
posted selected warriors on various entries of the city: on east Prahasta; on south 
Mahaparshv, and Mahodar; on west Indrajeet; on north Shuk and saran. He also 
mentioned that he would himself inspect the northern entry. In central Lanka, Virupaksh 
was made responsible to maintain complete vigil for safety and security. 

6-37 Ram deputed warriors (37 / 1340) 

Ram met with his select team to ponder over the strategy of victory. Those present in 
that consultation were Lakshaman, Sugriv, Hanuman, Angad, Vibhishan, Jambvan, 
Sharabh, Sushen, Maind, Dwvid, Gaj, Gavaksh, Kumud, Nal and Panas. The common 
impression was that Lanka was impregnable from all sides. 

In the meanwhile, Vibhishan informed them, “My four ministers Anal, Panas, Sampati, 
and Pramati had been in Lanka in the guise of birds. They have come back with the 
details of strategy adopted by Ravan. Prahsta has been posted on eastern gate, while 
Mahaparshv and Mahodar had been commanded to safeguard southern gate. On 
western gate Indrajeet has been deputed. Ravan shall himself be on the northern gate 
assisted by Shuk, and Saran. Virupaksh has been posted in the central Lanka.” 

Elaborating on the army strength, Vibhishan mentioned, “There are ten thousand 
elephants, ten thousand chariots, twenty thousand horses, and over ten million infantry 
in the demons army.” Vibhishan introduced his four ministers to Ram who elaborated 
what they have themselves observed with their own eyes. 

Later, Vibhishan mentioned, “Let us take stock of the real strength of the enemy. The 
idea is to make matching preparations and not to get panicked or scared from the 
enemy’s strength. When Ravan had attacked over Kuber, he was accompanied by six 
hundred thousand demons, and each one of them was as strong as Ravan himself. I am 
sure for Ram nothing is impossible, and he can very comfortably win the demons.” 

Learning from the ministers of Vibhishan, Ram also announced the counter team against 
each strategic locations of the demons, “Neel will face Prahsta on the east gate. Angad 
will tackle the demons on the south gate. On the west gate Hanuman will take care of 
Indrjeet. On north, with Lakshaman, I shall be present to deal with Ravan. Vibhishan, 
Jambvan and Sugriv shall attack on the centre of the city.” 


Page 26 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Ram also announced, “The monkeys shall remain in the original form of a monkey, and 
they will never disguise themselves in the humans’ form. Only seven of us: me, 
Lakshaman, Vibhishan with his four ministers shall maintain the original human form.” 

Concluding the consultations, Ram expressed his desire to climb the top of suvel 
mountain to have a better view of Lanka. 

6-38 Ram at suvel top (20 / 1360) 

While climbing the suvel mountain, Ram was accompanied by Lakshaman, Sugriv, 
Hanuman, Angad, Vibhishan, Jambvan, Sharabh, Sushen, Maind, Dwvid, Gaj, 
Gavaksh, Gavay, Sharabh, Gandhamadan, Kumud, Neel, Panas, Her, Rishabh, 
Durmukh, Shatval and other fast moving monkeys. On way Ram mentioned, “This suvel 
mountain is rich in varieties of precious metals and gems. From here we will have a 
better view of Lanka, where the devil Ravan resides. He committed a great sin by 
stealing away my wife Sita. Due to him only, we will see the end of the other demons of 
this beautiful city.” 

While roaming over the suvel top they took a close look at Lanka. The gates, and 
ramparts being protected by demons were distinctly visible. The presence of demons on 
guard appeared like second rampart around the entire city. 

The sun was about to set while they were on top of suvel. Subsequent full moon light 
enhanced the grandeur of visual delight, and they stayed there with a view to spend the 
night. 

6-39 Lanka viewed from Suvel (28 / 1388) 

At night they took a look at Lanka from the top of suvel. Lanka was situated on top of 
tirkut mountain which was impregnable from all considerations. The city had white 
mansions perched in sky like white clouds. Groves, orchards, and forests enhanced its 
grandeur. All varieties of fruits bearing trees were full of bees and delicious fruits similar 
to nandan van of Indr, and chaltrarath of kuber. Chirping of birds was the common 
scene. The fragrance of various kinds of flowers had permeated the entire environment. 
Ram along with his team was surprised to see the grand setting as well as natural 
resources of Lanka. A few monkeys sought the permission of Sugriv to visit Lanka. They 
entered the city in disguise, and were highly impressed by the richness of the demons of 
Lanka. The city had a conference hall (chaitya Prasad Ifwtr ) supported by thousand 
pillars. It was most charming and considered to the gem of the city of Lanka and was 
heavily guarded by the demons. 

6-40 Sugriv wrestled with Ravan (30 / 1418) 

Subsequently, Ram along with others climbed the highest peak of suvel which was two 
yojan wide. They had a better view of Lanka situated at trikoot top. The city was full of 
well planned gardens and groves. While gazing around, they came across a view in 
which Ravan was visualized sitting at a terrace of one gopur. He was being fanned by 


Page 27 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


chavar. His dress was red and the jewels were also red. His body had been smeared 
with red sandal. The dent of airavat’s tusk over his chest was distinctly visible. 

Looking at Ravan, Sugriv became suddenly excited. He leaped through sky and landed 
at Ravan’s terrace. Looking at him for a few moments he spoke to Ravan, “I am a 
friend 21 as well as a servant of the master of the universe, Ram. I will not spare your life 
today.” 

Saying thus, he jumped over him and snatched his crown. Later Ravan also retaliated by 
lifting him up bodily and thrashing him down over ground. Sugriv bounced up like ball 
struck over ground, and he also lifted up Ravan bodiy, and thrashed him heavily over 
ground. Such attack and counter attack continued for some time. Their body had shining 
flow of sweat and blood from bruises, and they looked more like flowers of semal and 
pa/as. While engaged in fierce wrestling, they together holding each other closely, fell 
down the terrace deep in the ditch. Lying unconscious for some time, they again 
resumed the combat. All sorts of tricks using fists, nails, slaps and punches were often 
being used by both of them. 

Subsequently Sugriv realized that Ravan would resort to tricks of magic, and he leapt up 
in the sky, and landed to Ram among his supporting group of monkeys. He was greeted 
heartily by the chiefs of monkeys. 

6-41 An envoy - Angad (99 / 1517) 

Looking at Sugriv’s body bruises, Ram embraced him, and spoke, “Being the sovereign 
king of monkeys you shouldn’t have attempted such adventure. I had expected 
counseling with me, before you take any decision. You can’t imagine my anxiety! I was 
worried about your safety, and had determined that if anything happened to you, after 
killing Ravan, handing over Lanka to Vibhishan, and Ayodhya to Bharat, I would end my 
life. I believe, in future you won’t undertake such a adventure.” 

Respecting his anxiety, Sugriv mentioned, “I knew my potential, and when I saw the 
abductor Ravan, how could I have pardoned him?” Greeting Sugriv’s words, Ram spoke 
to Lakshman, “The creation of several contingents out of this huge army, we would be 
able derive the maximum benefit. Taking care of availability of sweet water and delicious 
fruits, let us finalize the formation of strategic contingents and their respective posting.” 

Ram also pointed towards appearance of bad omens indicative of universal loss of lives: 
(i) wind has become stormy, (ii) earth quakes, mountains swing, and elephants 22 
produce terrifying sound, (iii) clouds shower bloody drops, (iv) the terrible evening turns 
bloody red, (v) sun drops fire flashes, (vi) meat eater animals wail looking towards sun, 
(vii) moon has reduced brightness and is encircled by red and black rings, (viii) sun is 


21 oTtcRTTRT ipgr 3HT 5frt Wt I 6-40-10 


1 Here mention is made to celestial elephants who support the earth and they are called diggoj [d J J I -1 


Page 28 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


encircled by small red ring, and has black spots, (ix) stars are hazy, (x) crows, vultures 
and hawks swing over ground, and jackals wail terribly. 

“Although Lanka is impregnable, let us attack at the earliest” ,said Ram, and began 
coming down suvel. Coming to foot hill zone, Ram made a move in auspicious moment 
(ggrf ) to charge the first attack over Lanka. Lanka was decorated with flags, and 
festoons hoisting high in the sky. The high ramparts and strong gates were impregnable, 
but regardless of these constraints, the monkeys’ army made a move to lay siege 
around the city. 

Leading the huge army, Ram with Lakshaman arrived at the north gate where Ravan 
was in command himself. Neel assisted by Maind and Dwvid took control of the east 
gate. Angad having company of Rishabh, Gavaksh, Gaj, and Gavay occupied the south 
gate. Pramathi and Praghas with other monkeys followed Hanuman on the west gate. 
Sugriv accompanied by mighty monkeys took the responsibility to attack over the central 
Lanka. Sushen and Jambvan with large contingent of warriors stood in reserve on rear 
guard. All the monkey warriors were equipped with huge rocks and trees. They had been 
swinging their tail with excitement of combat. The monkeys had laid a siege around 
Lanka, and their frequent uproars were heart rending for the demons. 

In the meanwhile, Ram pondering over standard practices of statecraft, beaconed 
Angad. Discussing with Vibhishan and others, he advised Angad to go flying over the 
ramparts as an envoy to Ravan and convey him my last message, which might help in 
bringing him back to reasons. Ram briefed Angad, “Ravan, you have committed 
grievous sins torturing sages and gods. Deceiving me, you abducted my wife. All your 
sins have prompted us to come to your threshold. Come out, and fight. Don’t confine 
yourselves within the ramparts. Pray your deities, and offer last oblations. Your end is 
imminent. Alternatively, you may surrender and return Sita to me.” 

As directed by Ram, Angad leapt across the ramparts, and went inside Ravan’s palace. 
Standing before Ravan, he repeated the message conveyed by Ram. Hearing him, 
Ravan became very angry and commanded demons to kill him. Four mighty demons 
stormed over Angad and got hold of him. Angad taking them together, made a terrible 
sound, and leapt over the terrace of that building. While Angad had reached the terrace, 
those demons had fallen midway over ground. Roaming freely over the terrace he 
continued producing terrible sound. With the impact of his footsteps, the roof got 
damaged with wide cracks. Ravan was upset with the development, and Angad taking a 
galloping stride arrived back to Ram. 

While monkeys had laid a successful siege of Lanka, the ramparts were fully occupied 
by them. It appeared as if the ramparts were made of monkeys only. Sushen continued 
inspecting all the gates, and passed on updates to Ram. Most of the demons had been 
terribly frightened with the uproarious presence of monkeys around Lanka. Some of the 
demons were excited about the imminent combat, and awaited passionately the royal 
command. 


Page 29 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-42 Monkeys fought demons (47 / 1564) 

When Ravan heard about the siege around the city, he doubled the reinforcements over 
the gates and himself went to the terrace. He saw to the end of his sight monkeys 
occupying the space outside the city, and the ramparts as well. Monkeys had also 
strengthened their positions by occupying the diagonals also, for the cardinal directions 
were already commanded by the designated chiefs and their contingents. Vibhishan with 
mace in his hand had taken his position near Ram. 

Subsequently, Ravan commanded the demons to attack over the monkeys. Soon, the 
battle trumpets rented the air. The demons equipped with varieties of weapons came out 
of the city. Ram asked monkeys to attack, and they stormed in competition to attack over 
demons T I ww™ 6-42-9). Sounding glory to 

Ram, Lakshamand and Sugriv the monkeys swooped over demons. The demons also 
shouted galore the glory to Ravan. Fierce fighting began between the demons and the 
monkeys. Monkeys were using trees, rocks and their nails while demons used swords, 
tridents and iron clubs. 

6-43 Demons suffered humiliation (46 / 1610) 

Demons riding horses, chariots and elephants crowded all the quarters outside Lanka. 
Galore of sound was heard from the movement of chariots. The chaos of fight broke the 
previously fixed order of the chiefs. Angad was seen engaged with Indrajeet. Pranjangh 
demon was engaged with Sampati (demon assistant to Vibhishan), and Jambumali was 
detained by Hanuman. Vibhishan himself fought Shatrughn demon. Gaj fought Tapan 
and Neel had taken over Nikumbh. Sugriv had his combat with Praghas, while 
Lakshaman fought with Virupaksh. Four demons Agniketu, Rashmiketu, Suptaghn, and 
Ygyakop were engaged with Ram. Maind fought Vajramushti, and Dwvid engaged 
Ashaniprabh. Nal fought fiercely with Pratapan. Sushen, son of Dharm successfully 
detained Vidyunmali. 

Hair raising fierce fighting took place between monkeys and demons. Indrajeet pounded 
mace over Angad, who in turn crushed his chariot with the horses. 

When Prajangh shot three shafts over sampathi, he used aswakarn tree to kill him. 
Chriot riding Jambumali was eliminated by Hanuman. Nal destroyed both the eyes of 
Pratapan. 

While Praghas caused havoc over monkeys, he was finally killed by Sugriv. Lakshaman, 
torturing Virupaksh with several shafts, finally shot a lethal shaft and he died. 

Four demons fighting Ram, had caused bruises over him, but getting angry, he 
beheaded them by his deadly arrows. 

When Maind charged his deadly fist, Vajrmushti crashed over ground with his chariot. 
Nikumbh had injured Neel who was damp black in complexion, with his arrows, but using 
the wheel of his chariot, Neel beheaded him as if Vishnu had used his disc. 


Page 30 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Ashniprabh had caused severe injury to Dwivid using his deadly arrows. Fighting with 
rocks and hillocks Dwvid had suffered a lot, but finally he used a sal tree to crush him 
and his chariot to dust. 

Vidyunmali while riding a chariot had injured Sushen with swift arrows. Finally Sushen 
used a rock mass to crush his chariot, and the demon jumping down over ground fought 
with mace. Sushen had to bear a heavy punch of the mace, but using a hillock he 
smashed the demon’s chest, and he dropped dead. 

The battle ground was filled with the dead bodies, headless corpses of monkeys and 
demons. The broken bows, swords, chariots and dead horses created an awful scene. 

Although the demons had been heavily humiliated, they awaited the arrival of dusk for 
renewed attack over the monkeys. 

6-44 Ram and Lakshaman in serpent noose (39 / 1649) 

The day came to an end, but the fighting didn’t stop. Demons made a renewed attack at 
night. Prevailing upon the constraint of darkness of the night, both parties continued 
fighting. Demons appeared to have an edge at night, but monkeys also didn’t give up. 
The hand to hand combat caused innumerable loss of lives. 

Demons surrounded Ram and showered sharp shafts over him. Soon he cleared the 
siege, and killed those demons. His lighted arrows provided enough light over the battle 
ground. 

Angad while fighting with Indrajeet had destroyed his chariot. Feeling humiliated, 
Indrajeet disappeared, and invoked his potential of showering arrows from the invisible 
state. Fie was blessed by Brahma for performing such a miraculous feet. Fie invoked 
serpent shaft, and Ram and Lakshaman were seen chained by the deadly serpents. 

6-45 Monkeys in deep shock (28 / 1677) 

Ram directed ten mighty monkeys to locate Indrajeet. Those monkeys were: two sons of 
Sushen, Neel, Angad, Sharabh, Dwvid, Flanuman, Sanuprasth, Rishabh, and 
Rishabhskandh. Carrying rocks masses and trees they made a frantic search in sky, but 
Indrajeet couldn’t be located. While monkeys were on search, Indrajeet continued his 
deadly assault over the enemy army. Fie shot shafts of all varieties narach (^ftet circular 
tip), ardhnarach ('3T#TFTP sem/'-circular tip), bhall spear tip), aanjalik 

palm with fingers tip), vatsdant (Tfi^t calf teeth tip), sinhdanstr (vW,^ |j on teeth tip), 
and kshur (g 7 knife tip). His deadly shaft shot over Ram and Lakshaman didn’t spare 
any space over their body where blood didn’t ooze out. Both brothers looked liked a fully 
blossomed pa/as. The influence of the shafts caused Ram to close his eyes and fell 
unconscious. Chained by snakes, Lakshaman was highly shocked to see Ram going 
unconscious. Monkeys were afraid of the developments, and they surrounded both the 
brothers. They were puzzled, and were not able to decide further action. 


Page 31 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-46 Victorious Indrajeet met Ravan (50 / 1727) 

Those ten monkeys who were on search of Indrajeet, arrived where Ram and 
Lakshaman were lying unconscious. They were in deep shock. Vibhishan was surprised 
to see the development. He used his magical power and saw Indrajeet standing nearby. 
Indrajeet bursting into derisive laughter mentioned, “The killer of Khar and Dushan is 
dead now. None of the sages and gods can liberate them from this deadly noose.” 

Remaining invisible, he also shot deadly shafts to injure the mighty chiefs of the monkey 
army: nine arrows over Neel, three on each of Dwvid and Maind, single arrow in chest 
of Jambvan, ten arrows over Hanuman, Gavaksh and Sharabh with two shafts, several 
arrows over the chief of langur Gaj, and Angad. 

Grieved by the plight of unconscious brothers, Sugriv wept bitterly. He felt as if he had 
become an orphan. Vibhishan consoled him and taking water in his hand he wiped the 
tears from his face. He advised, “It is not a moment for losing the courage. Uncertainty is 
the special characteristics of a battle ground. If we have balance good luck, they will 
arise from unconsciousness. Those who are adherents 23 of truth and righteousness 
never fear of death. Let us now encourage our monkeys who have become nervous with 
this development. I am sure two brothers are invincible and soon they will regain their 
consciousness. At this time we have to ensure their full protection.” Vibhishan then 
moved towards the panicked monkeys with a view to encourage them. 

Indrajeet was extremely excited with his success, and he described about his 
performance to the other demons. The demons celebrated the victory of Indrajeet. 
Together they went back to Lanka. Indrajeet conveyed the happy news to Ravan 
declaring the end of Ram and Lakshaman. Ravan was proud of his son, and embracing 
him closely, he extended warm greetings to him. As desired by Ravan, Indrajeet 
described in detail how he had brought end of Ram and Lakshaman. 

6-47 Sita in pushpak viman brought to Ram and Lakshaman (24 / 1751) 

Selected monkeys Hanuman, Angad, Neel, Sushen, Kumud, Nal, Gaj, Gavaksh, Gavay, 
Sharabh, Gandhamadan, Jambvan, Rishabh, Skandh, Rambh, Shatbali, and Prithu 
maintained strict vigil around Ram and Lakshaman. They held heavy trees in their 
hands, and with the slightest shaking of grass they were scared of arrival of the demons. 

Ravan, seeing off his valorous son Indrajeet, sent for the demonesses on guard to Sita. 
On arrival of Trijata 24 with demoneses, Ravan spoke to them, “Tell Sita that Ram and 
Lakshaman had been killed by Indrajeet. Take her in pushpak viman and show the 


23 3r!ra*#HTt)Hi ^ 6-46-33 

24 Trijata ( teZT ) has for the first time appeared here in valmiki ramayan ('this sarg 47 of yuddha kand) . Earlier demonesses named kala ( 
5-37-11 sundar kand sarg 37 shlok - 11) elder daughter of Vibhishan, and sarama ( ■’-KHI 6-33 -1 yuddh kand sarg 33 shlok -1 ) have been found 
showing sympathy to Sita. 


Page 32 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


condition of those two brothers. She will have to now come to me as her husband is 
dead. She has lost her base, and try to bring her round to accept me.” 

Subsequently, Ravan made an announcement in the city that Ram and Lakshaman had 
been killed by Indrajeet. 

As commanded by Ravan, the demonesses took the pushpak viman to ashok vatika. On 
their behest, shocked Sita, hearing the news of two brothers, boarded pushpak viman. 
As desired by Ravan, the viman flew over entire Lanka showing her the grandeur of the 
city decorated with flags and festoons. When her viman drew close to Ram and 
Lakshaman she found them lying chained in arrows over the ground. They were 
unconscious. Their bows and arrows were lying scattered there. The quivers from their 
shoulders had gone loose. Immersed deeply in sorrow of their pitiable plight, she wailed 
bitterly. 

6-48 Trijata consoled Sita (37 / 1788) 

Sita lamented loudly, “The astrologers had predicted about my long married life as well 
children to me. Ram was predicted to preside over several ygya as monarch of Ayodhya. 
Belying all predictions, today he has clung to the ground. It is said the sign of lotus on 
feet and hand bring auspiciousness. Soft, uniform and black hair, separated eye brows, 
hairless and round shining leg below the knee, and close teeth are considered 
auspicious for a woman. When I move ten fingers and soles of my feet find full contact 
with ground. My hands and feet are shining and charming. The sign of full barely exists 
over them. My fingers of hand when brought together don’t leave any gap, and they 
contact each other fully. My breasts are fleshy and touch each other. The nipples are 
inward. The navel is deep within the raised adjoining portion. The presence of such 
signs with me has failed to fetch my well being. He alone killed multitude of demons in 
Janasthan, crossed the vast sea safely, but he has been drowned in the ditch of a cow 
hoof. They had all divine weapons in their possession; why didn’t they use them. I am 
more concerned about my mother-in-law who had been awaiting his return. How ill fated 
I am!” 

Trijata consoled her by describing various noticeable auspicious signs. She mentioned, 
“I am highly impressed by your adherence to chastity and moral conduct. I advise you to 
discard your grief about death of two brothers. They can’t be dead. First and foremost 
striking feature is the presence of charm on their faces. They are lying with divine smile 
and freshness. A dying person could never demonstrate 25 such sign. Second, If you 
were a widow, pushpak wouldn’t have accepted you on board. They are invincible 26 by 
any of the gods and demons. How can death ever visit them?” 


25 PPFT WfETHT I Hcrfrf I I 6-48-32 

26 sTci# tht dfg gngf l rtTfsf w 4i<flRri i i 6-48-30 


Page 33 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Hearing Trijata, Sita spoke to her, “Sister, let it be so." Sita’s pushpak viaman was soon 
brought back in Lanka, and she was placed in ashok vatika again. 

6-49 Ram back to consciousness (33 / 1821) 

When monkeys were on guard to the unconscious brothers, they found Ram coming 
back to consciousness. Ram saw Lakshaman lying unconscious in pool of blood chained 
by the serpent arrows. He began lamenting loudly, “How unlucky I am that I see my 
younger brother lying on ground. What shall I gain by getting Sita, if I lose Lakshaman? I 
can another Sita, but getting brother like Lakshaman is impossible. What reply shall I 
give to mother Kaikeyi, Kausalya and Sumitra. How shall I face my other two brothers 
Bharat and Shatrughn? Lakshaman had the skill of shooting five hundred shafts at a 
time, surpassing the skill of legendry archer kartvirya arjun. What did he not use that skill 
and lying in such a state. I am ashamed of my failing words that I couldn’t anoint 
Vibhishan as king of Lanka. O Sugriv, Angad, Dwvid, Maind, Jambvan, Gavay, Gavaks, 
Gaj, Nal, Neel, and other valorous warriors! I am highly satisfied by your loyalty and 
friendship. I advise you to immediately go back crossing the sea. When I am no more 
Ravan will see you with contempt.” 

In the meanwhile, Vibhishan, black in complexion, had come back to Ram, after assuring 
the monkeys about the situation and providing them safe place. The rest of the 
monkeys, who were near Ram, mistook Vibhishan as Indrajeet, and became panicked. 

6-50 Ram and Lakhaman freed of serpent chains (65 / 1886) 

Sugriv saw panicked monkeys running here and there. He wanted to know from Angad 
the reason for the panic among monkeys. In the meanwhile Vibhishan arrived, and Suriv 
could easily make out that reason for panic among the monkeys was the mistaken form 
of Vibhishan as Indrajeet. Those monkeys were afraid that Indrajeet had arrived again. 
Sugriva advised Jambvan who was standing on his side to go and pacify the monkeys. 
Jambvan immediately restored normalcy among the monkeys. 

When Vibhishan saw Ram and Lakshaman lying in pool of blood, he was gripped by the 
grief and he lamented loudly, “Now there is no hope of my becoming the king of Lanka. 
The treacherous son of Ravan has proved him right that he won’t return Sita.” He wiped 
with water the eyes of Ram and Lakshaman, and continued wailing. Sugriv consoled 
him, “You are sure to become the king of Lanka. They will soon rise free of the deadly 
chain." 

Subsequently, Sugriv spoke to his father-in-law, Sushen, “When they gain 
consciousness you taking them over your shoulder carry to Kishkindha. I alone would 
settle with Ravan, and retrieving Sita would soon come back.” 

Sushen mentioned, “I have witnessed the battle between gods and demons. When gods 
lied unconscious in the battle field, preceptor Bruhaspati, revived them using his mantr 
W and divine herbs. There are two mountains called Chandr (g^r ), and Dron (sfar) on 


Page 34 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


the coast of ksheer sagar (str w milky ocean). They were installed by gods 
themselves during the stirring mission (srp to 4T tjj to) of the ocean for nectar. These 
mountains possess two divine herbs: sanjivkarani (4totofr), and vishalyakrni (ftf 4 tofr) 
produced by Brahma himself. Sampathi and other monkeys know those herbs. He can 
go with Panas and bring that medicine. Hanuman should also go to help bring those 
divine herbs.” 

While the issue of procuring herbs was being discussed, there was a visible disturbance 
all around. Trees were swinging as if storm had appeared. Sky was overcast and 
lightning flashes were seen. Broken branches floated in sea. The scared creatures and 
serpents ran for life. Soon the bright object landed close to Ram. He was garud, son of 
vinita. 

Noticing the arrival of garud, the serpents disguised as arrows ran away. Garud washed 
the faces of Ram and Lakshaman and with his physical contact, two brothers woke up 
fresh and bright. There were no signs of any injury over their body. Garud embraced two 
brothers to his chest. Seeing that Ram spoke to him, “I am highly obliged to you for your 
greatness of liberating us from the deadly bond of the demon. I see you fully dressed in 
divine cloths, jewels and flower garland around your neck. You have a charming 
personality. Who are you?” 

Garud's eyes were full of tears of affection, and he spoke, “I am your friend 27 , and your 
own soul wandering outside. I learnt from the gods that you have been chained by the 
deadly serpents. They were sons of kadru, very deadly serpents, and no one can survive 
their attack. They have been transformed into arrows by power of sorcery of the demon. 
Ram, you will emerge victorious, and shall soon get back with Sita. Now I seek your 
permission to leave the place. You should not keep in your mind what I mentioned about 

my friendship 28 with you. On the conclusion of this mission of Lanka, you will reward me 
for my service.” 

Circumambulating Ram, and embracing him again, garud disappeared with wind speed 
in sky. Monkeys celebrated the occasion by uproarious sound and trumpeting of conch 
to express their happiness. The moneys swinging their tails, rushed to Lanka with trees 
and rocks in their hands. All the quarters were rented with their uproars. 

6-51 Dejected Ravan dispatched Dhumraksh (36 / 1922) 

When Ravan heard the glorious uproar of monkeys he became anxious to know the 
cause behind their happiness. He asked the demons to find out the cause of their 
uproar. Demons climbing the roof top saw Ram and Lakshaman in readiness to face the 
demons. With pale face they came down and informed Ravan about the survival of the 


27 3^ wm cr mw * r to tor gftor i 6-50-46 

o 

28 ? g to toto to w l epto to ’tftor tortor l l 6-50-57 


Page 35 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


two brothers. It was a shock for him, and he heaved deep sighs like a deadly snake. He 
commanded, Dhrmraksh to face the monkeys. 

On his command, that dreadful demon made immediate gathering of the army and riding 
a chariot pulled by asses moved to the battle field. The asses of his chariot had faces of 
various animals, i.e. , lion, and wolf etc. The demons army moved with spears, tridents, 
clubs, swords, pestles etc. Their weapons had rings attached to them which produced 
ringing sound with their slightest movement. 

Accompanied by a huge army, Dhrmraksh emerged at the western gate where 
Hanuman was in command. Bad omens afflicted the demon’s chariot. Vulture and hawks 
fell fighting over the flag mast. One white trunk of a body wet with blood, producing 
terrifying sound fell near him. The stormy wind blew with deafening noise, making the 
surrounding hazy and gloomy. 

6-52 Hanuman killed Dhumraksh (38 / 1960) 

Terrible combat took place. Monkeys used trees and rocks while demons shot arrows. In 
duel within close range, fist, and nail of monkeys were enough to counter their clubs and 
tridents. Dhumraksh proved deadly by arrows and killed scores of monkeys. Hanuman 
attacked over him with a heavy hillock. Afraid of the attack, the demon quit his chariot 
which was soon crushed to ground. Taking mace in his hand he was fighting Hanuman. 
Although he banged the mace over his forehead, Hanuman hurled a rock mass over him 
which crushed his bones to dust, and he was no more. Other demons who were with 
Dhumraksh ran away when they saw his end. 

6-53 Vajradanshtr in command (32 / 1992) 

Having come to know the end of dreadful Dhumraksh, Ravan deputed Vajradanshtr who 
was known for his sorcery. Riding a chariot, and accompanied by army mounted on 
asses, horses, elephants and camels he left for the battle field. Coming out of the south 
gate, he was face to face with Angad. Soon bad omens afflicted the surroundings of the 
demons. The meteors dropped from the clear sky. The jackals produced fire flashes 
from their mouth. Other animals created terrible noise. The soldiers fell down without any 
obvious reason. Vajradanshtr ignored the bodings and moved with his army. Soon the 
demons and monkeys were engaged in close fighting. At the one hand, the demon was 
deadly with his arrows over monkeys, on the other, Angad spared no chance to kill the 
demons. 

6-54 Vajradanshtr killed (37 / 2029) 

Assaults by monkeys proved superior to the assaults made by demons. Vajradanshtr 
was angry with the humiliating status. He commenced swift shooting of shafts over 
monkeys. Angad was also trapped in his whirlpool attack. Angad tried to contain his 
move by hurling heavy logs of trees but they were cut to pieces by his sharp arrows. 
When Angad hurled a massive rock, the demon quit his chariot which was soon crushed 
to dust. Taking mace the demon fought with him. The pounds of Angad made the demon 


Page 36 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


unconscious, and after a while he again picked up the fight. They were engaged as if 
mars and mercury 29 were in combat (6-54-28). 

(Note: Valmiki is full of such quotations depicting the inherent nature of stars 
useful for astrological studies). 

Angad took up a sharp sword (could be from the battlefield lying in the vicinity) and cut 
asunder the head of Vajradanshtr. The surviving demons took to their heels, and 
seeking safety entered the city. 

6-55 Akampan on battle ground (32/ 2061) 

When Ravan knew about the end of Vajradanshtr, he asked Prahast who was standing 
before him with folded hands, to send Akampan to the battle ground. Preparations were 
made and the army moved in advance to the battle ground. Mounted on a huge chariot, 
Akampan came out sprawled like a dark cloud, producing thunderous noise. He was 
known for his firmness, and he had rebutted in past, the assaults of gods. When he 
moved out, suddenly he felt lack of excitement. The horses pulling the chariot had also 
indicated their poor interest. Ignoring such forebodings, Akampan came forward 
terrifying the monkeys. His movement was so terrifying that monkeys got scared. 

The movement of huge army raised red dust over the battle field. The quarters had 
become hazy, and the visibility was marred so much so that monkeys were assaulting 
monkeys, and demons were assaulting demons. 

(Note: It is noteworthy that the battle ground was so much soaked with blood, that the dust had become of 
red colour.) 

Massive killing took place, and the battle ground was strewn with trunks and heads. 
Leading the monkeys Kumud, Nal, Maind and Dwvid caused wanton destruction of the 
demons army. 

6-56 Hanuman killed Akampan (39 / 2100) 

Noticing huge and fast loss of the army, Akampan asked the charioteer to take him to 
those dreadful monkeys. His sharp arrows caused injury to them. Akamapan also 
caused killing of scores of monkey army. Hanuman could notice the demon’s notoriety 
and he rushed over him with rocks. Monkeys were encouraged by the presence of 
Hanuman. Akamapan and Hanuman were engaged in fierce fighting. Whatever rocks 
was hurled by Hanuman, Akampan could easily counter them. Later, Hanuman tried in 
vain the heavy logs of aswakarn tree. The demon remained undaunted, and he 
continued showering arrows like Indr’s down pour during rainy season. Finally Hanuman 
was able to kill the demon Akampan with an infallible shot of a tree. 


29 


This suggests the prevalence of malefic relation between mars and mercury. 


Page 37 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


When Akampan was grounded, his army ran away to Lanka. When victorious Hanuman 
came back to his camp, he was received warmly by Ram, Lakshaman, Vibhishan and 
Sugriv. 

6-57 Prahast on move (44 / 2144) 

After the end of Akampan, Ravan pondered sincerely over the development. He went on 
inspection of the contingents posted on strategic locations. While observing the city from 
various places during his inspection, he found laying of complete siege of Lanka by 
monkeys. He spoke to Prahast, “The situation have come to such a pass that either 
Kumbhakarn, or Indrajeet, or Nikumbh or you can steer it through to a safe condition.” 

Prahast readily accepted the challenge, and spoke to Ravan, “Several times the issue 
was discussed among us. Divergent opinions have lead to this situation. I was of the 
opinion from the beginning that our wellbeing was in returning Sita to Ram (6-57-14). 
Otherwise the battle was imminent, and consequently today we have come to such a 
critical situation. I have been honoured by you, and I am not bothered about my wife, 
children and my life. You will see how I would sacrifice my life for your wellbeing.” 

Assuring thus Ravan, Prahast made a move to the battle field. He was accompanied by 
scores of chiefs and a very large army. Before leaving, the demons offered oblation of 
ghee to fire god, and its fragrance ( 6 - 57 - 21 ) permeated around the city. They put flower 
garlands charged by appropriate mantr invoked by Brahmins ( 6 - 57 - 22 ). 

Riding a huge and beautiful chariot, when Prahast moved out of east gate, he was 
surrounded by his four close aids Narantak, Kumbhhanu, Mahanad and Samunnat. 
Tumultuous sound produced by movement of his chariot, which terrifying to hear. His 
chariot was fortified from all sides. Golden screen had enhanced its grandeur, and the 
flag to the chariot was marked with sign of a snake. 

Grandeur of his movement was soon marred by the bad omens. Several times, the 
charioteer missed the whip which fell down on ground. On plain land, the horses of the 
chariot had a fall. Jackals produced fires from mouth. Comets fell from sky, and wind 
had become rough. The planets in sky were engaged in combat causing dim of their 
brightness. The cloud’s thunder was like asses sound, and blood precipitated over the 
chariot. A vulture facing south perched over the flag. 

The moment he landed over the battle ground, he found monkeys in readiness fully 
equipped with rocks and trees. The uproars of monkeys, and demons trumpets together 
caused fear among the citizens of the city. 

6-58 Neel killed Prahast (61 / 2205) 

Ram was surprised to see the mammoth army surrounding Prahast. He asked 
Vibhishan, “Who is this valiant warrior ?” Vibhishan introduced him by name of Prahast 
and mentioned that one third of army’s strength was with him. 


Page 38 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Soon both sides engaged in fierce fighting. Swords, clubs, trees and rocks countered 
each other. Four aids to Prahast were killed by eminent monkey warriors: Narantak by 
Dwvid, Samunnat by Durmukh, Mahanad by Jambvan, Kumbhahanu by Tar. 

Prahast was shocked by the loss of his dreadful aids. Overwhelmed by great anger, he 
showered arrows over the monkeys and continued killing them. Neel noticed the wanton 
killing of monkeys. He was very angry and he also caused massive end of demons. 
Prahast observed the loss of demons by Neel and he diverted his chariot to tackle Neel. 
Coming close to him, Prahast caused grievous injury to Neel. His body was bathed in 
blood. For some time, Neel tolerated the shower of arrows as if a bull was undaunted by 
rains. Subsequently, he charged a heavy tree causing loss of horses of Prahast’s 
chariot. Neel was soon able to break his bow also. Having lost his bow, Prahast attacked 
over Neel holding pestle in his hand. The punch of pestle over the forehead of Neel 
caused gushing of blood to drench him head to foot. Neel picked up a tree and dashed 
over his chest, but the demon remained undaunted. Immediately, Neel picked up a huge 
hillock, and dashed over Prahast. This caused the end of the demon and his head was 
crushed to hundreds of pieces. 

While Ravan was grieved with the news of end of Prahast and pall of gloom was cast 
over Lanka, Neel was accorded warm greeting by Ram and Lakshaman. 

6-59 Ravan humiliated on ground (146 / 2351) 

Ravan was extremely shocked to learn the end of Prahast. He announced, “So far I had 
taken the enemy as a trifling one, but now I don’t want to encourage them further. I 
would myself take command over the battle ground today." 

With the sounding of trumpets, conches, drums, and cymbals Ravan moved out 
surrounded by select warriors. When Ram saw the huge army coming out of Lanka, he 
enquired from Vibhishan as to who were there in the army. Vibhishan introduced one by 
one, “One mounted on elephant is Akampan (other than that killed earlier). One riding 
the chariot with flag of lion sign, has got teeth like tuskers, and wielded rainbow like bow, 
is Indrajeet. He is blessed with several boons. One who is large like vindhyachal, 
astachal, and mahendrgiri, is producing sound from the string of the bow is Atikaya. The 
other one riding an elephant is continuously producing sound like ringing bells is 
Mahodar. One riding the horse equipped with spear is Pishach. Holding brilliant trident, 
and riding a white bull is Trishira. (Note: different from the one killed in Janasthan. This one is 
son of Ravan). Kumbh is on a chariot carrying vasuki nag marked flag. Nikumbh is one 
who is holding an iron club shining like fire, and is flag of the demons. Narantak (son of 
Ravan) is riding a brilliant chariot equipped with bow, sword, spear and mace. Ravan is 
there under an umbrella over a chariot and is surrounded by demons having faces of 
tiger, camel, elephant, deer, and horse. He his having crown over his head and is as 
large as several mountains and had been known for humiliating the gods.” 

Ram was glad to see Ravan and he, assisted by Lakshaman awaited his arrival over the 
battle ground. Before coming to combat, Ravan wanted proper protection of the city of 


Page 39 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Lanka, because he was afraid of monkeys running into the city and causing damage to 
gardens and mansions. He therefore asked those eminent warriors to stay back in 
protection of the city. 

Ravan, moving forward, made lethal charges of over monkeys. To counter his attack, 
Sugriv opposed his movement with a huge rock mass in his hand. When he hurled that 
rock mass over Ravan, he very swiftly cut them into pieces. In turn, he shot a deadly 
arrow to kill Sugriv. Hit by that arrow Sugriv fell unconscious over ground. Gavaksh, 
Gavay, Sushen, Rishabh, Jyotirmukh and Nal came forward to safeguard Sugriv. They 
hurled heavy rocks over Ravan but countering their attack, he quickly caused them to lie 
over ground. Moving ahead, he created havoc among the monkeys. Some of them ran 
to Ram for refuge. 

When Ram intended to come forward to face him, Lakshaman interfered and sought the 
permission to deter Ravan. Ram forewarned Lakshaman, “Ravan is a great warrior. Be 
careful and take advantage of his weak points. Don’t allow him to take advantage of your 
weaknesses.” Giving respectful round to Ram, Lakshaman proceeded to restrain Ravan. 
He was impressed by his long and swift arms, and the mighty bow he was holding. 

Hanuman, in the meanwhile, discarding the arrows of Ravan rushed close to him. He 
defied the demon, “Do you see my mighty right hand raised up? It will soon end your 
life.” Ravan replied, “Let me see your strength first, thereafter I would decide the severity 
of punishment to you.” When Hanuman reminded him about killing of Akshkumar, he 
became angry and immediately pounded heavily over the chest of Hanuman. This 
caused giddiness to Hanuman, but getting over it soon, he also slapped Ravan. Ravan 
was shaken severely as if mountains had swung due to earthquake. Having seen Ravan 
slapped, the celestial beings shouted cheers to Hanuman. By this time, Ravan 
composed himself and praised Hanuman, “Hail to you, you are worthy of combat with 
me.” Hanuman mentioned, “I pity on myself, that you are still alive. O, devil! Let me face 
you once more, then I would dispatch you to the death world.” Hearing Hanuman defying 
thus, Ravan punched a well composed deadly fist over his chest. Hanuman was again 
destabilized, and realizing his condition, Ravan picked up his fight with Neel. When 
Hanuman composed himself, he found Ravan engaged with Neel. He didn’t interfere and 
allowed him to fight Neel. 

Ravan charged several arrows over Neel. In retaliation, Neel hurled massive rocks and 
trees over him but he countered them successfully. Subsequently, Neel squeezed 
himself to a smaller form and perched over the flag of his chariot. Very swiftly he 
changed his position from flag, to his bow, to his crown. Seeing such a miraculous 
swiftness of Neel, Ravan was agitated, but Ram, Lakshaman and Hanuman appreciated 
his valour. Ravan soon charged a deadly fire-shaft over Neel which hit his chest, and he 
sat on ground taking support of his knees. He was son of fire, so he was able to survive 
the attack. 

Ravan shifted his attention to Lakshaman who had by that time come to him resonating 
the string of his bow. He challenged the demon king, “Leave the monkeys, and taste my 


Page 40 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


arrows now." Ravan warned him, “It is good that you have come. Now I will dispatch you 
to the death world.” Lakshaman spoke to him, “I know your valour of stealing a woman. 
Warriors never prattle, instead they act.” 

When Ravan charged seven sharp arrows over him, he easily countered them. Both 
exchanged deadly shafts over each other, and none was getting hurt. Ravan then 
charged a kalagni shaft, gifted by Brahma, which hit the forehead of Lakshaman. He was 
in swoon for a while, missing his grip over the bow, but soon he recomposed himself. 
Swiftly he cut down Ravan’s bow and shot three shafts over him. Ravan was severely 
injured and went unconscious. Getting back his consciousness he found himself 
drenched in perspiration and blood. He took out the potent weapon ( shakti to) 
obtained from Brahma. That looked like a smoking fire ball, and he charged that 
over Lakshaman. Despite his swift shafts, he couldn’t save himself, and the 
shakti hit his chest grievously. He fell unconscious, and his body looked being 
torched with fire. Ravan rushing close to him, tried to lift him in his arms. Lo and 
behold! One who was capable of lifting three worlds together with mandrachal, 
the Himalayas and meru could not budge the younger brother of Bharat (6-59- 
111 ). 

Note: The divinity of Bharat is equally significant to note who by dint of his penance had 
gained enough potential to ward off evils. Moreover, he had always prayed for the 
wellbeing of his wandering brothers in exile. Bharat was considered an incarnation of 
disc, and Lakshaman was an incarnation of serpent couch of Narayan. Bharat 
renounced the royal comfort and stayed in similar condition of forest life at 
Nandigram. He was in fact wandering soul of the supreme spirit, Narayan which 
was earlier indicated by garud, by his statement 3 ^ wr a to tor toEFs 1 6- 
50-46. The weight of righteousness has become heavier to the sinner like Ravan that he 
was not able to budge him. 

Although Lakshaman was hit by shakti , he maintained his gravity of being an eternal part 
and parcel of Narayan (6-59-112 ). 

(Note: It is also noteworthy to recall that earth is supported over sheshanag hoods. How 
the obliging earth would release the bond with the one who supports her!) 

Hanuman stormed over the site where Ravan was trying his strength to lift Lakshaman. 
He slapped heavily over Ravan who fell on his knees and went unconscious. Bleeding 
through his mouth and ears Ravan took shelter in the rear part of his chariot. The 
celestial beings hailed the humiliation of Ravan. 

Hanuman lifted Lakshaman in his arms and brought to Ram. shakti afflicting Lakshaman 
soon deserted him and came back to Ravan. Ravan also recovered from his fit, and 
became equipped with a large bow and sharp shafts. 


Page 41 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Lakshaman recalling his divinity, recovered soon to his normal strength and freshness. 
(6-59-122 s I ftaq'F'Ti'tpa miv-aid gnrgFFi). 

Ram realized the defeat of eminent warriors of his side. Holding his bow, he forthwith 
moved forward to contain Ravan’s forward movement. Hanuman coming to him 
reminded him of his limitation and constraint of being on foot, and he offered him his 
shoulder to carry him swiftly form one place to another. Ram obliging Hanuman by 
occupying his shoulders. 

Chasing Ravan, Ram rebuked him, and reminded him of his sinful acts. Hearing his hurt 
rending words, Ravan caused grievous injury to Hanuman who was his carrier. Getting 
injured the valour of Hanuman got further enhanced, but Ram was enraged by his act of 
injuring Hanuman. 

Soon he destroyed each and every constituent of Ravan’s chariot. When Ravan was 
standing over ground, he struck shafts over his chest. As a result Ravan lost grip of his 
bow and the bow fell down over the ground. Following in quick succession, Ram cut his 
crown into pieces, and Ravan was forced to stand over ground, weaponless and 
crownless. Showing mercy upon him, he spared his life mentioning, “You are tired today. 
Come later equipped with new weapons.” 

Humiliated, Ravan entered Lanka. The celestial beings were extremely happy to witness 
such a humiliating retreat of Ravan to Lanka. 

When Ravan had left the ground, Ram took out the sharp arrows from the body of his 
eminent monkeys who recovered soon from the injury caused in the battle field. 

6-60 Waking up of Kumbhakarn (98 / 2449) 

When Ravan was back to his palace, he was pale and dejected due to humiliation of the 
battle field. While addressing the demons, he revealed, “(i) Brahma’s words appear to be 
true today. When he granted me boon of immunity against gods, gandharv, yaksh, 
demons, and nag, he indicated the potent danger from humans, (ii) Long time ago, king 
Anarany of the Ikshvaku family had cursed me that a member of his family would cause 
complete annihilation of my race. It seems Ram is that person indicated by Anarany. (iii) 
Earlier when I raped Vedvati, she had cursed me, and Sita appears to be the 
manifestation of that curse, (iv) Due to my lifting of Kailas, Uma felt uncomfortable, and 
she cursed my death due to a woman, (v) I had ridiculed the monkey form of 
Nandishwar, and he cursed the elimination of my family from the monkeys, (vi) When I 
teased Rambha, wife of Nal kubar, I was cursed to die if I raped any woman in future, 
(vii) Similar curse was hurled by Brahma when I had teased Punjiksthala, daughter of 
Varun, that an attempt to rape with a woman would cause my death.” 

Ravan exhorted the demons to protect Lanka from this calamity. He recalled the 
contribution of Kumbhakarn, “He is a renowned and invincible warrior. If he is awakened, 
he can kill the monkeys, Ram and Lakshaman. He sleeps for either six, or seven, or 


Page 42 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


eight or nine months. He is sleeping from the time he gave me his counsels, and it is 
now nine months. All attempts should be made to wake him up.” 

Kumbhkarn was sleeping in a secluded cave which was one yojan wide and one yojan 
long. The entry door of the cave was sky high. The cave was full of fragrance of fresh 
flowers. Ten thousand demons arrived to wake him up. Initially they were blown out at 
the entry gate itself from the vigorous wind generated by breathing of Kumbhakarn. With 
utmost effort they could enter the cave. He was sleeping fully dressed. The golden 
crown over his head was like brilliant sun. The golden armlets had further enhanced his 
personality. Before waking up, collection of all sorts of animals, wine, and blood to 
appease his hunger, was kept ready near him. 

They began him waking with the application of sandal paste over his body which earlier 
had odor of flesh and blood. They recited his glory, blew conches and other instruments 
but there was no change, and he continued sleeping. Hundreds of pitchers of water were 
poured into his ears, camels and other animals were forced to run over him but he didn’t 
respond. Lastly when thousand elephants were run over him, he quit his slumber and 
got up. He was very hungry and soon he finished all food stuff of camels, buffalos, 
cows, and goats gathered for him. He finished all the pots of blood and wine. 

The demons with great courage gathered around him. He enquired from the demons, 
“Why did you wake me up? Is everything fine in Lanka?” 

Yupaksh, the secretary to Ravan, submitted with folded hands, “We are passing through 
a very critical period which we hadn’t faced earlier while fighting gods. An ordinary 
human, Ram had devastated untold misery over Lanka. Earlier, his messenger, a 
monkey came and burnt entire Lanka to ashes. Now the city is under siege of monkeys 
from all around. Today, the demon king Ravan has been spared life on the grace of 
Ram. He was humiliated over the battle ground and made weaponless and crownless." 

Kumbhakarn assured them, “He would devour all the monkeys, and their blood would 
irrigate the earth. Ram and Lakshaman would also be eliminated within no time. First, I 
will go to the battle ground, and eliminating the enemy I would see Ravan. 

Hearing his assertive assurance, Mahodar spoke to him politely, “Let us first meet 
Ravan, and then take further action." Kumbhakarn agreed to his submission. In the 
meanwhile, Ravan got the news of awakening of Kumbhakarn. The demons sought his 
permission to fetch Kumbhakarn to him. He gladly consented, and awaited his arrival at 
his palace. 

Kumbhkarn asked for some more refreshment before leaving to meet Ravan. After 
gulping down two thousand pots of wine, he felt fresh and moved out to see Ravan. 

While walking through streets of Lanka, his mountainous body was seen by some of the 
monkeys. They got scared, and went running to Ram to inform him about a strange 
creature in Lanka. 


Page 43 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-61 Ram learnt about Kumbhakarn (40 / 2489) 

When Kumbhakarn walked though streets he appeared like Trivikram who had appeared 
to measure the universe (gn tt 6-61-2). Ram also took a look at Kumbhakarn and 

he enquired from Vibhishan, “Who is this creature in Lanka? Is he a demon or monster? 
He appears to be a moving dark cloud with ever present lightning over his head.” 

Vibhishan narrated the whole story, “From his childhood he is like this. He is son of 
Vishrava, and is the tallest among all the demons. Quantum of his food intake is very 
high. Scared by his devouring of the creatures coming in his view, people complained to 
Indr. Indr attacked over him with his bolt. Later, he broke the tusk of airavat, elephant of 
Indr, and pounded with that the chest of Indr. He became unconscious. Consequently 
gods and demons approached Brahma, and sought the solution, otherwise soon 
Kumbhakarn would make the earth empty of all leaving beings. Brahma himself came to 
see him, and trembled to see his huge form. He cursed him to sleep for ever like a 
corpse. Instantly, Kumbhakarn fell asleep. Seeing his curse, Ravan prayed Brahma, 
“Have mercy on him and grant him some liberty.” Brahma agreed to allow him awake for 
a single day after the slumber of six months.” 

To dispel the fear from the mind of monkeys, Vibhishan advised Ram to convey to Neel, 
“This is not a living being, rather it is a mechanical device created by demons.” 

Ram soon advised Neel to make all preparations of laying siege around Lanka. 

6-62 Kumbhakarn met Ravan (24 / 2513) 

Passing through the main streets of Lanka Kumbhkarn received warm welcome of the 
residents who showered flowers over him. When he arrived at the palace of Ravan, he 
offered his salutation over his feet. Ravan greeted him warmly by embracing him. 
Kumbhakarn taking his seat enquired from Ravan, “Why did you wake me up? What 
help do you need from me?” 

Ravan presented the updates to him, “Since long you were sleeping. Sri Ram (6-62-14 
gr crmflrs 4# I tig? g gyf ts I I) son of Dasarth in cooperation 

with monkeys’ king Sugriv bridged the sea and coming over to Lanka has caused great 
loss to us. Our selected warriors have been killed, and our entire family is on the brink of 
disaster. We have run short of resources for our treasury has become empty. I have 
pinned great hope over you. Never before, we faced such a calamity. Now only you can 
save us. You have great affection for us. I didn’t make such request to any of my 
relatives earlier.” 

(Note: For the first time Ravan has expressed respectful address to Ram by adding Sri aft to his 
name. In some versions of valmiki, in place of #ng only tfts is found. 


Page 44 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-63 Kumbhakarn criticized Ravan ( 58 / 2571) 

Responding to Ravan’s request, Kumbhakarn expressed his opinion freely, “In this 
respect you had been warned earlier also (refer sarg 5) when I was awake and a war 
council was summoned for discussion on this issue. At that time, Ram hadn’t crossed 
the sea and was camping on the other shore. There was time left to save the demons’ 
race from destruction. The sensible king should always act in advance for getting 
maximum benefit of sam, dan, bhed i.,e. conciliation, gift and dissension. Before using 
these policies he should properly assess the extent of loss and gain in having an 
encounter with the enemy. If there is a probability of loss, use gift policy, and go for 
truce. If neither loss nor gain is expected, go for dissension and conciliation. If gain is 
expected then only go for encounter. There is a need to consider the use of these five 
factors with a balanced mind. For a success, it is always necessary to derive maximum 
benefits from the advice of sensible ministers.” 

Elaborating his view point and referring to the earlier discussion Kumbhakarn mentioned, 
“We had also discussed about the appropriateness of time to attain dharm 
(righteousness), arth (wealth), and kam (pleasure). One should always not be after 
attaining kam, i.e. , pleasure only. Obviously, out of five factors, there emerges two broad 
combinations of actions: (i) loss + gain + righteousness ( dharm SFT ) + wealth ( arth 3T?T) + 
pleasure ( kam TTT), and (ii)) loss + gain + conciliation (sam TFT ) + gift ( dan TFT) + 
dissension ( bhed 'ifT). You ignored the advice of those who differed from you, and 
preferred to hear them who talked supporting your immoral acts pleasing to your ears. I 
wish you could have paid heed to the words of your beloved Mandodari, and my brother 
Vibhishan (6-63-21). Now you do what you wish.” 

Reacting to Kumbhakarn, Ravan raised his eye brows and spoke, “This is not the time 
for discussing what has gone by. Don’t teach me lessons. I didn’t seek your support to 
hear these instructive counsels. One’s own is that person who acts according to the 
situation. It is time to save the family from the brink of disaster.” 

Kumbhakarn sensed the anger lurking in the mind of Ravan, and he immediately 
assured him, “I would go alone over the battle ground and kill Ram and his other 
supporters. I want to see that before your death, I must sacrifice my life. Soon I would 
produce to you the head of Ram, and thereafter, Sita will be permanently yours.” 

6-64 Mahodar’s short cut (36 / 2607) 

Mahodar, one of the valorous warriors, reacted sharply to the statement of Kumbhakarn, 
and addressing him he spoke, “Your teachings are not new. Ravan, the mightiest king of 
the demons, is fully aware of what to do and what not to do. He knows the 
appropriateness of time of an action. For a king most important is the attainment of 
pleasure and his effort to attain this is appreciable. As regards your moving to battle 
ground alone, is not proper. Ram has been a renowned archer and he killed the demons 


Page 45 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


in Janasthan alone. How would you be successful alone fighting with a warrior of this 
stature? There is no parallel of him among humans (6-64-18).” 

(Note: This statement confirms the supreme divinity of Ram. Even demons have accepted this as 
a fact that Ram has no parallel among humans, which means he is from supernatural world and 
supreme himself.) 

Addressing Ravan he advised a short cut to gain Sita’s favour, “An announcement 
should be made in the city that Mahodar, Dwijihva, Sanharadi, Kumbhakarn, and 
Vitardan are leaving for combat with Ram. If the enemy survives our attack, and we also 
come back alive, using our skill of sorcery, we will have arrows fixed on our bleeding 
body inscribing name of Ram. Coming to you, we will announce that we have devoured 
Ram and Lakshaman and his army has been eliminated. This will be announced in the 
city, and a celebration shall be organized for giving precious gifts to the demons and 
enjoying the occasion with wine and dances. You will also grace the celebration by your 
personal participation in the revelry. Sita will come to know about the celebration, and 
thereafter, you approach her alone. She has been using royal facilities, and when she 
will come to know of end of Ram and Lakshaman, finding no option she would prefer to 
avail your offer. I believe this is how you can win her favour and attain your objective 
without visiting the battle field anymore.” 

6-65 Kumbhakarn to Battleground (57/ 2664) 

Kumbhakarn rebuking Mahodar, spoke to Ravan, “The real warriors don’t talk, they 
perform. Mahodar is a sycophant, and persons like him are responsible for the present 
pass. I would now proceed to the battle ground alone and bring the head of Ram.” 

Laughing, Ravan supported his views and said, “Mahodar is scared of Ram, and that is 
why he talks of short cuts to avoid the combat. I would advise you to go with army. 
Monkeys are very naughty and they would cause injury to your vital organs.” 

Ravan dressed Kumbhakarn with varieties of gold and other precious jewels over his 
arms, ears, hands and head. Kumbhakarn looked like a brilliant sun. His trident was also 
tipped with gold. His chest was protected with strong gold shield. He was wearing a red 
garland, and Ravan put a heavy gold necklace over him. He also put fresh flower 
garland around his neck and wished him victory. 

Circumambulating Ravan, when Kumbhakarn intended to move out, he appeared like 
trivikram bhagwan (6-65-31 ^rjlrHisl iUN'Ji f3FT#r) stepping up to measure the 

universe. He was six hundred bows wide and one hundred bows high. At the time of his 
departure, trumpet and conch sounds rented the air. He moved out by stepping over the 
ramparts of the city. Huge army of chariots, horses, elephants and infantry accompanied 
him. 

When he came out he saw sea of monkeys around the city. He expressed his mercy on 
them and mentioned, “Monkeys are jewels of gardens. They haven’t caused any harm to 
us on their own, and therefore, they need not be killed. The root cause of this calamity is 


Page 46 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Ram and Lakshaman. I would eliminate them, and the poor monkeys would melt away 
themselves. 

While he was stepping forward occurrence of bad omens took place: a vulture perched 
over his trident, meat loving birds gave a clockwise round of him, jackals vomited fire, 
wind was harsh, sky was overcast with dust, meteorites fell, sun dropped fire balls. 
Despite all such forebodings, Kumbhakarn was not deterred, and he continued his 
movement forward with thunderous sound. 

6-66 Panicked monkeys (33 / 2697) 

Kumbhakarn’s formidable personality caused panic among monkeys. They were running 
helter-skelter. Angad addressed Nal, Neel, Kumud and Gavaksh to convince them about 
the magic of demons. While coming back they hurled heavy rocks and trees over 
Kumbhakarn. He was not bothered about their attack, for all the rocks and trees striking 
his body had turned into pieces. Kumbhakarn’s moving steps continued crushing the 
scores of monkeys. Getting upset of their failure, and uncertainty of falling prey to the 
monstrous demon, monkeys again took to their heels. Despite several reminders of 
Angad and others they didn’t listen. They answered, “We love our life, and can’t sacrifice 
ourselves like this.” 

Somehow, again with great persuasion of Angad, they fall back to Sugriv awaiting his 
command. 

6-67 Ram killed Kumbhakarn (177 / 2874) 

Monkeys had returned with their renewed spirit. They continued showering rocks and 
trees over Kumbhakarn. Using his mace, Kumbhakarn was able to counter the heaviest 
of missiles charged by monkeys. He picked up the monkeys in groups of eight, ten, 
twenty and thirty and devoured them alive. Dwvid targeted him with a hillock. It missed 
him, and fell over the demons army causing loss of scores of chariots, horses, elephants 
and demons. 

Hanuman commenced showering rocks from sky over his head. With his trident, he 
easily cut down the hills and trees into pieces. When he intended to move towards the 
monkeys, Hanuman stood on his way to detain him. Hanuman hit heavily over his head 
with a large hillock and he was bathed in fat and blood. He became very angry and 
struck his trident over Hanuman’s chest as if Kartikeya had struck the Kronch mountain 
(6-67-19). Hanuman was grievously injured, and blood oozed from his mouth. Demons 
army was delighted to see Hanuman in pitiable condition. 

Monkeys were again gripped by panic, and to encourage them, Neel hurled a heavy 
hillock over him. Using his fist, he easily powdered that rock into dust. Sharabh, 
Rishabh, Neel, Gavaksh, and Gandhamadan made a concerted attack over him. 
Catching each of them he rubbed them to bleed. When thousands of monkeys perched 
over his body and used their nail and teeth to injure him, he felt as if something had just 


Page 47 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


touched him. At that time he looked like a mountain enhanced by scores of trees. As 
garud eats snakes, similarly he continued devouring monkeys. 

Some of the surviving monkeys rushed to Ram to narrate the holocaust of the demon. 
In the meanwhile, Angad charged a very large hillock over his head, which caused injury 
to his head. In retaliation, he moved his trident over Angad but he escaped safely. In 
turn, Angad jumping over him, punched heavily over his chest and he was in swoon. Full 
of wrath, he pounded Angad with clenched fist of his left hand, and unconscious Angad 
was down over ground. 

Sugriv rushed to help Angad and he charged a heavy hillock over him which struck his 
chest. Although the hillock was crushed into powder, it enraged him and he hurled his 
trident over Sugriv. Hanuman caught the trident midway and broke that 1000 bhar (unit 
used to express weight of an item) heavy trident taking support of his knees. Monkeys 
were elated on breaking of trident by Hanuman. 

He was very angry and he picked up a mountain and dashed over Sugriv. When Sugriv 
fell flat, he picked up unconscious Sugriv from ground, and pressing him between his 
arms left for Lanka. He thought this will end the war itself. Hanuman was puzzled, and 
he intended to charge an attack over him but he thought, “Let me wait. The moment 
Sugriv will regain consciousness, he will come out of his clutch. If I try to recover Sugriv 
from him, Sugriv will later feel unhappy for that will belittle his status and fame.” 

By this time, he had entered Lanka holding Sugriv in his arms. The citizens greeted him 
by showering scented flowers and water. The spray of water and the fragrant flowers 
helped Sugriv in regaining consciousness. He found himself under the clutch of the 
demon. Using tooth and nail, Sugriv cut off his nose and ears. He also grievously 
injured his belly. Soon Sugriv was thrown over ground, but catching sugriv again he 
began rubbing him over ground. Somehow Sugriv escaped, and springing up like a ball 
in sky, arrived to Ram. 

Losing his nose and ears, he was bathed in blood. Looking dreadful, he returned to 
battle ground and stormed over monkeys like a hawk. He was very hungry, and picking 
monkeys in groups he began eating them alive. 

Having seen great havoc and loss of monkeys, Lakshaman came forward shooting 
seven shafts over his chest. He was not disturbed by the charges of Lakshaman. Soon, 
Lakshaman covered him with his swift arrows and he looked like anshumali sun hidden 
behind the clouds. Coming out of the cover of arrows, he praised Lakshaman, “You are 
a child, but still I am impressed by your archery. Several mighty gods like Indr, and 
Varun don’t dare face me. I don’t want to kill you. I want to kill only Ram. Once Ram is 
killed others will die automatically.” 

Lakshaman showed him Ram who was standing with a stable mind. He stormed over 
him swiftly. Ram charged deadly Raudastr causing grievous injury to him. Chasing 
monkeys he whirled around Ram. Due to pain of piercing arrows, he lost the grip of his 


Page 48 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


mace. Losing his mace, he used his hands and fists to kill the monkeys. The sharp 
arrows of Ram caused profuse bleeding over his body. 

With a view to contain the destruction caused over monkeys, Lakshaman chalked out a 
plan and spoke to Ram, “This monster is deadly as well as hungry. It has lost its sense 
of discrimination and has devoured monkeys and demons together. Let our monkeys get 
perched over his body which will save their life.” When the monkeys perched over him, 
he became very angry, and threw them off through vigorous shaking of his body. 

Ram continued his attack over him, and he was able to counter those deadly arrows of 
Ram easily. When the shaft used to kill Vali, didn’t hurt him at all, Ram, shot vayavastr 
and cut his right arm. The amputated hand, while falling killed several monkeys. 
Charging another deadly arrow, his left arm was cut, which fell over demons and caused 
great casualties. Soon, both his legs were cut, and he kept running with his trunk and 
devouring monkeys. Ram charged a shaft similar to the potential of brahmdand, which 
cut his head off his trunk. His head flying high in sky fell down in Lanka. While falling in 
Lanka, it caused immense damage to scores of mansions. His trunk fell in sea, and 
crushing the marine creature went deep into water. 

Sages and celestial beings greeted Ram for killing him. Monkeys were overjoyed and 
hailed Ram’s victory with uproarious sound. 

6-68 Wailing Ravan (24 / 2898) 

When Ravan learnt of falling of Kumbhakarn’s head in Lanka, he was cut to the quick. 
Lamenting loudly, he fell over ground unconscious. Devantak, Narantak, Trishira and 
Atikaya were shocked by the killing of their uncle. Mahodar and Mahaparshv were 
deeply grieved with the news of killing of their step 30 brother, Kumbhakarn. Time and 
again Ravan had spell of fit remembering his brother. He expressed, “There is no use of 
availing this kingdom. Losing Prahast and Kumbhakarn has made me hollow. I can’t 
sustain the shock any more. I would soon follow the path set by Kumbhakarn. Now I 
repent for ignoring the advice of Vibhishan. Today’s sorrow is the consequence of 
driving out of noble Vibhishan (6-68-23 frm Wf§ TfcqT TT I WIT snffe 

%TTT T fTqms I I ) from Lanka.” 

6-69 Angad killed Narantak (96 / 2994) 

Ravan was consoled by his son Trishira, who reminded him of his immense potency, 
“You have several boons and weapons in your possession obtained from Brahma. You 
have a mighty chariot pulled by one thousand asses. You shouldn’t lament like an 
ordinary being. You have been victorious over the earth and you can readily kill Ram. 
Alternatively, if you permit me, I can go to the battle ground and kill Ram as if garud kills 
a snake. You should no longer worry about this.” 


30 Shlok 6-68-7 and 8 describe the relationship of eminent demons with Ravan. 


Page 49 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Ravan’s three other sons Narantak, Devanatak and Atkaya also joined Trishira with an 
intention to console their father and take an opportunity to visit the battle ground. Ravan 
was greatly encouraged by their desire to go to battle ground. These sons of Ravan had 
been famous warriors and had no record of defeat in the past. Ravan readily agreed and 
sent them with his two brothers Mahodar and Mahaparshv to provide them necessary 
protection. 

All the six, two brothers and four sons of Ravan departed for combat with Ram. As a 
customary practice, before they left, they touched several herbs and fragrances and 
circumambulated Ravan with respect. Mahodar mounted an elephant called sudarshan 
from the dynasty of airavat. Trishira rode a chariot fully equipped with his select 
weapons. His grandeur was enhanced by three crowns one over each of his three 
heads. The greatest archer, Atikaya rode another brilliant chariot equipped with swords, 
clubs, maces and arrows. Narantak mounted on a white horse as magnificent as 
Ucchaihshrava. He appeared like kartikeya mounting a peacock (6-69-30). Devantak 
held high parigh (iron clubs) in both of his hands, as if Vishnu had held mandrachal (6- 
69-30) during stirring of ocean. Mahaparshv equipped with mace in his hand, looked like 
mighty kuber. 

Coming out of Lanka, accompanied by huge army of demons, those six great warriors 
took a look at hordes of monkeys. With the trumpeting and vocal uproars they soon got 
engaged in combat. While demons used arrows to prevent the forward movement of 
monkeys, in retaliation monkeys hurled heavy rocks and trees over them. Besides 
missile using missiles of rocks, monkeys also used their tooth and nail to kill the demons 
in one to one duels. While demons snatched rocks and trees from monkeys and used 
over them, in similar fashion, monkeys also forcibly grabbed the weapons from demons 
and killed them with their weapons. 

Narantak riding his horse pierced through the hordes of monkeys. Using his spear he 
caused their death. Sugriv noticed the terrible end of monkeys on the hands of 
Narantak. He commanded Angad to take care of Narantak. Soon Angad was on his way 
and restrained his movement. He asked Narantak to use the spear over his chest. The 
demon, hurled the spear over Angad which fell broken over ground. Angad using his 
slap, killed the Narantak’s horse. Coming to ground, Narantak punched his heavy fist 
over Angad’s forehead and he was bathed in blood. Regaining his balance, Angad 
pounded a heavy fist over the demon’s chest, and he fell dead over the ground. 

6-70 Hanuman, Rishabh, and Neel killed eminent demons (67 / 3061) 

When Narantak was killed, other eminent demon warriors Devantak, Trishira, and 
Mahodar, who had come with him surrounded Angad. Picking up a tree, Angad made 
an attack over Devantak, but that was countered by arrows of Trishira. Although Angad 
was alone, and he was to face three demons warriors, he didn’t lose heart. With the 
heavy slap of Angad, Mahodar lost his elephant. Using the tusk of the dead elephant, 
Angad assaulted Devantak. The demon was terribly shaken, but he charged his iron club 


Page 50 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


over Angad and he fell on his knees. Soon he recovered and leapt up, but Trishira shot 
three arrows in his forehead. 

Hanuman and Neel rushed to help Angad, who was fighting alone with three demons. 
Neel hurled a massive rock over Trishira which was counterd into pieces with his swift 
arrows. Encouraged by this, Devantak charged his club over Hanuman. In retaliation, 
Hanuman punched his fist over his head and Devantak dropped dead. 

Trishira continued showering sharp arrows over Neel. Mounting another elephant, 
Mahodar rushed to Neel and hitting him with his sharp arrows he made Neel 
unconscious. After a while when Neel regained his consciousness, he took up a hillock 
full of trees and dashed over Mahodar. This deadly charge took the life of elephant and 
Mahodar together. 

Trishira was in full wrath over the death of his uncle. He showered deadly arrows over 
Hanuman. Hanuman also continued showering trees and rocks but they were brought 
down to pieces by the swift arrows of Trishira. Hanuman ran close to Trishira and killed 
his horses. The demon jumping down on the ground shot a potential shakti, but 
Hanuman caught it midway and broke into two pieces. Trishira then held a sword and 
attacked over Hanuman. Getting injured by his sword, Hanuman punched over his chest 
and he fell unconscious. Taking his sword, Hanuman began killing other demons. 
Trishira getting back his consciousness, soon bounced over Hanuman. Three heads of 
Trishira came in the grip of Hanuman, and he cut them asunder using his sword. 
Trishira was dead. 

Having seen the end of four great warriors, Mahaparshv took the command with mace in 
his hand. Rishabh came forward to face the dreaded demon. The demon pounded his 
mace over his chest and he fell injured over the ground. After a while when he 
recovered, he punched his slap over the demon. The demon fell over ground like an 
uprooted tree. Taking his mace in his hand, he produced a roaring sound. For sometime, 
the demon was unconscious. On recovering, the demon pounded heavily over Rishabh, 
and made him unconscious. Recovering from the fit, Rishabh charged the demon’s 
mace over the demon himself, and that caused his ultimate end. 

With the fall of Mahaparshv, five of six eminent warriors had met their end. Seeing such 
a great loss, the demons’ army ran away from the battle ground. 

6-71 Lakshaman killed Atikaya (116 / 3177) 

Out of four sons and two step brothers of Ravan who had visited together the battle 
ground, Atikaya was the only surviving son, and none of the brothers could stand the 
mortal attack of the monkeys. 

Atikaya was blessed with a monstrous body. Seeing him riding a mammoth chariot 
pulled by thousand horses, monkeys got an impression of revival of Kumbhakarn. He 
appeared as if bhagwan Trivikram had expanded his form (6-71-8). Panicked monkeys 
took refuge to Ram. 


Page 51 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Ram, taking a look at Atikaya, enquired from Vibhishhan, “Who is this demon blessed 
with such a huge body? His chariot is equipped with varieties of ten numbers of large 
bows. Two swords, having six cubit long handle, and fifteen cubit in length, hang on the 
sides of his chariot. The chariot’s flag is marked with the sing of rahu. There are four 
charioteers over his chariot. He has a red garland around his neck. His face between 
two earrings look like full moon flanked by twin punarvasu nakshtra (6-71-24 TTq 
qfJrjojf fTyriTTs). Looking like lion among demons, he is striding towards me.” 

Vibhishan informed Ram, “He is worthy son of Ravan from his second wife Dhanymalini. 
His name is Atikaya. He commands honor among demons, and is champion of several 
weapons. He has profound knowledge of scriptures and statecraft. He has earned boon 
of immortality from Brahma. The shield and chariot have also been gifted by him only." 

While they were talking, Atikaya countered the attack of all the eminent monkeys Dwvid, 
Maind and others. Steering through them he came straight to Ram and invited him for 
the fight. Lakshaman heard his challenge, and moved forward producing terrific sound 
from the string of his bow. Seeing Lakshaman drawing close to him, he spoke, “You are 
child. I can spare your life. Don’t wake up the dreaded dragon. I can soon dispatch you 
to the death world.” Soon he loaded an arrow over the string. 

Lakshaman retorted, “Come on! Don’t prattle unnecessarily. I am ready to see your 
performance. You know lord trivikram was a child (6-71-64 fewj/Tr f^TT^Tfg 
cbMiPsiRi^s), but his performance is known to all of us.” 

Soon they were engaged in fierce fighting. They continued countering each other’s 
shafts. Lakshaman hit an arrow that caused injury over his forehead. Later, he also shot 
a shaft in his chest. Lakshman had to bleed, and taking out that shaft from his chest, 
Lakshaman, again charged another shaft invoking fire god potential. Atikaya countered 
his shaft with a shaft having potential of mantr of sun. Atikay’s twashta arrow was 
countered by Indr arrow of Lakshaman. Lakshaman continued showering arrows over 
him, but he was not bothered, because he was blessed with an impregnable shield. He 
caused once more swoon to Lakshaman by hitting through a serpentine arrow. 
Lakshaman recovered soon and when he was about to shoot a shaft, Vayu god came to 
him and mentioned, “This demon has a shield from Brahma which is impregnable. You 
need to charge Brahmashtr over him.” 

Lakshaman charged that shaft with the potential of Brahmashtr and shot at him. The 
demon used several weapons to counter the arrow of Lakshaman, but he didn’t succeed 
and soon his head was found severed from his body. He was dead, and his huge army 
ran away in panic to Lanka. 

6-72 Ravan ’s anxiety (19 / 3196) 

Hearing the end of Atikaya and others Ravan got extremely astonished and shocked. He 
recollected how one by one his several invincible warriors Prahast, Kumbhkarn, 


Page 52 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Akampan and others had been eliminated. He thought, “Indrajeet had put these two 
brothers in deadly serpent bond and it was impossible to survive but I wonder how they 
countered that bond and came out victorious. Indeed, free from all sorrows and 
afflictions, Ram is Narayan 31 (6-72 -11 ?f *RT Wt 3F Tld'-Hli-MM'-H)." 

He warned the guards to be extremely vigilant and directed them, “Whether morning, 
dusk , or night, always keep the entry fully secured and barred. Keep strict watch over 
any movement to Sita in ashok vatika. The camps of army contingents have to be 
specially guarded.” 

Directing thus, with a pale face and agitated mind he entered his inner palace. 

6-73 Ram and Lakshaman made unconscious (74 / 3270) 

When Ravan was immersed in sorrow of loss of several eminent sons, brothers and 
warriors, Indrajeet consoled him, “I will avenge today itself the killing of all our near and 
dear ones. I will show you how Ram and Lakshaman would meet end of their life. All the 
celestial beings would watch my valour, like the valour of trivikram in the ygya of demon 
king Bali (6-73-07 T ltt-i-i'tI'J I fgujjip'cjijj 

Riding a chariot pulled by asses he moved out of the city to the battle ground. Huge 
army followed him for his protection. Before he moved Ravan had blessed him for 
victory. 

Coming to the battle ground, first he performed worship of the fire god under the 
protection of the demons. Alighting from the chariot he lit sacred fire, and offered him 
sandal, flowers, and paddy corn. In oblation he used havishya (sweetened rice). 
Baheda ( bibhitika 6-73-21/22/23) firewood was used in oblation. He used red cloth, iron 
ladle, and black goat in the sacrificial ritual. The fire flame had a clockwise twist, which 
indicated his ritual was successful as experienced in one of such rituals performed by 
him earlier. During the sacrifice, he invoked brahmastr and charged his bow, arrow, 
sword, chariots, charioteer and horses etc. This scared sun, moon, other planets, and 
celestial beings of the universe. Subsequently he disappeared with his chariot. 

Thereafter he joined the demon army and encouraged them to fight the monkeys boldly. 
Maintaining his invisibility, he himself showered arrows over the monkeys. Monkeys 
fought valiantly by showering heavy rocks and logs. Countering all the missiles of 
monkeys, he injured the eminent monkeys: Gandhamadan by 18 arrows, Maind by 7 


This shlok 6-72-11 is not found in some versions of Valmiki. One may refer shlok 6-6-17 / 18, where Ravan 
expresses his own impression about the divinity of Ram that he is capable of either crossing the sea, bridging it 
or drying up. In the background of the shlok 6-6-17 / 18, the shlok 6-72-11 appears to be relevant. Ravan was 
actually in doubt about the divinity of Ram at initial stage, but gradually his ignorance was cleared, and through 
6-72-11 he accepts his supreme divinity. By this time he has almost lost all his sons except Indrajeet, he was at a 
point of no return, and therefore he couldn’t move for truce. Upon death of Kumbhakarn, he had expressed his 
renunciation from the world, and he mentioned that it was of no use to live longer here. 


Page 53 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


arrows, Gaj by 5 arrows, Jambvan by 10 arrows, Neel by 30 arrows. For Sugriv, 
Rishabh, Angad and Dwvid he used several potent arrows and made them lifeless. 
Since he was invisible it was difficult for the monkeys to target him. In a bid to locate 
him in sky, when the monkeys raised their eyes towards sky, he shot arrows in their 
eyes. All the monkeys were blood soaked, and were lying flat over ground. 

Subsequently he moved to Ram and Lakshaman and showered arrows over them. Ram 
spoke to Lakshaman, “Indrajeet has been spirited by the potential of brahmastr and we 
have no option because we can’t see him. His greatest strength is his invisibility. We 
have to bear with him. Seeing us unconscious, he would be back to Lanka, announcing 
his victory.” 

Indrajeet made flat the entire army including Ram, and Lakshaman. He went back 
successfully to Lanka and saluted in the feet of Ravan. 

6-74 Hanuman brought herbal mountain (77 / 3347) 

Only Vibhishan and Hanuman had escaped the lethal attack of Indrajeet. Out five parts 
of the day, Indrajeet had been active through the period of four parts. He had withdrawn 
in the last, i.e., the fifth period. In his mission, six hundred seventy million (6-74-12) 
monkeys were affected. Vibhishan and Hanuman moved around encouraging the 
monkeys, “Ram and Lakshaman had suffered the pain to honour brahmastr used by 
Indrjeet. Both the brothers will regain the spirit, there is no doubt in it.” 

It was getting darker, and finding it difficult to identify the monkeys, Hanuman arranged 
a fire flame. Carrying that flame in hand, they inspected the monkeys lying on ground. 
Taking a look at the eminent ones, Vibhishan and Hanuman arrived where Jambavan 
was lying. When enquired by Vibhishan, Jambvan responded, “I am suffering immense 
pain of arrows stabbed deep in my body. But don’t worry, tell me whether Hanuman is 
alive and conscious.” Vibhishan was surprised and he queried, “You didn’t enquire the 
well being of Ram and Lakshaman and you are more concerned about Hanuman. Why 
?” Jambvan convinced him, “If Hanuman is alive we all are deemed to be alive. His 
service is very essential at the moment and nobody else would be able to do that.” 

When Hanuman saluted in his feet, he mentioned, “On the Himalayas, between Kailas 
and rishabh mountain there lies a mountain of life giving herbs. The herbs are of four 
categories: mritsanjivani (^pTTTTTTr), vishalyakarni (fci^wjji), suvarnkarni (WlTTWr), 
and sandhani (TTRT) (6-74-33). They always emit light. You have to come with those 
herbs at the earliest." 

Before leaving for the Himalayas, Hanuman expanded his body to a mountainous form 
similar to the one which he had adopted while crossing the sea to arrive in Lanka to 
meet Sita. Rocking sea, mountains and the city of Lanka, he flew towards the 
Himalayas. When he arrived on the Himalayas he visualized the abode of various sages 


Page 54 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


and gods: (i) brahmkosh and rajatalay 32 (ii) Indr, (iii) Rudr from where he charged arrow 
over Tripurasur, (iv) Hayagreev 33 sw, (6-74-59) (v) brahamshir , 34 (vi) death god, (vii) 
fire god, (viii) kuber, (ix) twelve suns, (x) Four faced brahma , (xi) bow of Shiv, (xii) navel 
of earth, (xiii) brushabh, mount of Shiv, (xiv) kailas , (xv) rishabh mountain. 

When he landed at the herbal mountain, he found the light emitting herbs as indicated by 
Jambvan but soon they disappeared. Probably the deities of the herbs were afraid of 
presence of a stranger. Hanuman was puzzled, and soon he took the decision to uproot 
the entire mountain. He successfully brought the herbal mountain to Lanka. Getting the 
sweep of breeze of the herbal mountain, everyone got up as they had slept for night. 
Ram and Lakshaman also got up causing great joy among the monkeys. The stabbing 
arrows came out on their own, and there was no sign of injury over the body. It was 
miraculous revival of the entire team. Hanuman swiftly took back, and restored the 
herbal mount to its original location between Kailas and rishabh. 

6-75 Lanka torched again (69 / 3416) 

On recovering from the Indrajeet’s deadly assault, Sugriv advised Hanuman, “Before 
break of the day, let fast footed monkeys set ablaze Lanka.” Accordingly they carrying 
fire flames in their hand, they made an attack over Lanka. Afraid of life, the guards of 
Lanka deserted their duty. Monkeys enjoyed free hand and entire Lanka was torched 
second time. (First time Hanuman had torched it during finding mission of Sita). 
Residents rushed out of their houses quitting their belongings. Gems, gold, corals and 
pearls melted with the heat of the massive fire. The red colour of burning Lanka reflected 
in sea, causing sea water to look red. 

Enraged Ravan commanded Kumbh and Nikumbh, sons of Kumbhakarn to attack over 
monkeys. They were given assistance of Yupaksh, Shonitaksh, Prajangh, and Kampan. 
On command of Sugriv the monkeys occupied their previously fixed gates and locations. 
Fierce night fighting took place. The flames in the hand of monkeys improved the 
visibility. 

6-76 Killing of eminent demon warriors (94 / 3510) 

Excited Angad had faced Kampan. The mace of Kampan caused injury over forehead of 
Angad, and he fell unconscious. When he regained his consciousness, he dashed a 
heavy rock mass over the demon, and he died immediately. 


Beginning of entry to Vaikunth lok 

33 One can visit aushadh giri 3TFTT Rl i I today at Thiruvahindpuram (also called Thiruvandipuram), near 

_r\ 

Cuddalore, Tamil Nadu, India. Hayagreev T5FJTT has two manifestations here: one with goddess Lakshmi called 

rs r\ p, 

Lakshmi - Haygreev cTFIT oZpjfcf, and the other alone in meditative posture called Yoga Hayagreev TFT SilTIlT. 
Vedantdesik Swami had pleased Haygreev here with his severe penance. It is said when Hanuman carried the herb 
mountain, a part of it has been placed here with the command of lord Hayagreev. 

34 

Present day brahmkapali at badrikasharm 


Page 55 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Finding Kampan dead, Shonitaksh another warrior demon, rushed over Angad. He was 
riding a chariot and he shot all sorts of arrows causing severe injury to Angad. Later, 
Angad crushed his chariot, bow and arrows. Shonitaksh renewed his attack holding a 
sword. Angad very swiftly snatched the sword from him, and grievously incised him 
diagonally (along the sacred thread - ygyopaveet) from left shoulder down to the right 
belly. Angad shifted his attention to other enemies, but soon he was surrounded by 
Yupaksh and Prajangh. Shonitaksh also recovered in the meanwhile and he chased 
Angad with a mace in his hand. Angad was between Shonitaksh and Prajangh, as if 
moon was between two vishakha nakshatra (6-76-15 tpraFT ^fFT#T I 

(Note: compare 6-76-15 with 6-71-24 qftgpjf fews This suggests that both 

vishakha and punarvasu are twin stars.) 

In the meanwhile Dwvid and Maind rushed to help Angad. Thus three demons were 
found engaged with three monkeys. Prajangh attacked Angad with a sword. Angad then 
countered him with aswakarn tree and broke his sword. He punched Angad with his fist 
over his forehead causing swoon to him. Recovering from that Angad slapped him such 
that his went off his body, and Prajangh was dead. Shonitaksh 

When Yupaksh saw that his uncle Prajangh was dead, with tear in his eyes he held a 
sword for he had no more arrows left with him. He rushed to Angad. In the meanwhile 
Dwvid pounded over his chest and held him in his arms. Shonitaksh was angry to see 
his brother Yupaksh trapped in the arms of Dwvid. He punched over the chest of Dwvid 
with his mace. Dwvid, subsequently snatched his mace when he tried to pound second 
time on him. 

In the mean while Maind arrived, and he punched over chest of Ypuaksh. Dwvid injured 
the face of Shonitaksh with his sharp nails, and dashing him down over ground, crushed 
him to death. Maind also trapped Yupaksh within his arms and crushed him to death. 

Demons army, finding their three warriors dead, swiftly shifted to the place where son of 
kumbhakarn, Kumbh was fighting. He consoled the demons and used his arrows to 
contain the forward movement of the monkeys. Kumbh was an accomplished archer. 
Dwvid was his first target and he laid him down over ground. Maind rushed to help his 
younger brother Dwvid, but he also met the same fate and fell unconscious over the 
ground by sharp arrows of Kumbh. Dwvid, and Maind were maternal uncle of Angad. 
Now Angad charged rocks and trees over Kumbh but he swiftly cut them away. He also 
caused severe injury over the eyebrows of Angad. Although it was bleeding, keeping his 
eyes shut Angad uprooted a huge sal tree and hurled heavily over Kumbh. The demon 
cutting down that hit Angad severely and he fell unconscious over ground. This news 
was brought to Ram by some of the monkeys. Ram soon dispatched Jambvan and 
others to resuce Angad. Kumbh swiftly countered the attack of Jambvan, Vegdarshi and 
Sushen. Kumbh was so fast that these warriors were not able to see him properly. 


Page 56 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


In the meanwhile, Sugriv came to assist Angad and other warriors who were fighting 
Kumbh. All charges of Sugriv were countered very swiftly by Kumbh. Sugriv, in a quick 
movement leapt over his chariot and snatched his bow from him. He broke his bow and 
came down the chariot. Sugriv praised him for his superb archery. He also appreciated 
him worthy like his father Kumbhakarn. Both Sugriv and Kumbh were engaged in 
wrestling. Sugriv hurled him up so much so that he fell into sea water causing a great 
tide in the vicinity. Coming out of sea water, he again engaged with Sugriv and dashing 
him down over ground crampled his chest. Sugriv’s shield was broken lose, and he 
became very furious. He pounded heavily over his chest, and he dropped dead. 

6-77 Hanuman killed Nikumbh (24 / 3534) 

When Nikumbh saw that his brother Kumbh was no more, he rushed with an iron club in 
his hand towards Sugriv. Nikumbh was a mighty warrior, and he wielded so swiftly the 
club, that the air of the area got ignited. When Hanuman detained him midway, he 
charged that club over his chest. Striking over Hanuman, the club was itself broken into 
pieces. It was Hanuman’s trun, and he pounded so heavily over his chest that he fell 
unconscious but soon he recovered and coming to Hanuman held him firmly in his arms. 
He moved towards Lanka. Demons hailed him for his valour to capture Hanuman, but 
soon Hanuman realesed himself from his clutch. He held him down over ground, and 
broke his head off his neck. Nikumbh was dead. 

6-78 Makaraksh on battle ground (21 / 3555) 

Ravan was shocked as well as angry on the news of killing of Kumbh and Nikumbh. He 
commanded, Makaraksh, son of Khar to move to the battle ground and kill Ram and 
Lakshaman. The demon offered his respectful round to Ravan and left as commanded. 
He rode a chariot and was accompanied by demons army. While his chariot moved 
there was storm of dust, and the flag of the chariot fell down. The charioteer missed the 
whip to ground. The horses wept and couldn’t pick desired speed. Makaraksh ignored all 
the bad omens and commanded to the army to commence the combat, while he 
intended to proceed to towards Ram. 

6-79 Ram killed Makaraksh (41 / 3596) 

Monkeys observed coming out of Makaraksh with demons army for combat. They 
charged attack over demons and fierce fighting took place. Makaraksh, using his swift 
arrows caused heavy casualty to monkeys army. 

To contain his movement, Ram came forward to face him. Seeing Ram, he spoke, “You 
are killer of my father Khar in Janasthan, and since then I am carrying the blaze of 
revenge in my heart. Somehow I couldn’t find you in Janasthan, but today the time has 
come to settle the score with you.” Ram advised him to perform rather than prattle. 

Both were engaged in fierce archery. Ultimately, Ram cutdown his bow, damaged his 
chariot, and he was forced to come down over ground. He charged a deadly trident 


Page 57 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


obtained from Shiv over Ram. Celstial beings, watching the war from sky, were 
panicked. Ram easily countered the trident cutting down by his arrow into several 
pieces. When he rushed with clenched fist to Ram, an arrow of Ram hit heavily over his 
chest, and he collapsed over ground. The accompanying army ran away to Lanka. 

6-80 Indrajeet again over battle ground (43 / 3639) 

On the news of death of Makaraksh, with clenched teeth, Ravan commanded Indrajeet 
to march to the battle ground. Indrajeet was out from the city, and he performed the 
oblation to fire on way to the battle ground. His weapons were used as kuhs mat, 
baheda tree as firewood 35 , iron ladle, and dark black goat in oblation. Women clad in red 
cloth appeared during the oblation, and flaming fire turning clockwise indicated his 
success in oblation. He invoked the favourite deity to maintain his potential to remain 
invisibilie. With the renewed spirit of oblation, he commenced the marathon mission. 

When he drove to Ram and Lakshaman he found them like three hooded 36 serpent. He 
was invisible, and the movement of his chariot didn’t produce any sound. His sharp 
arrows injured Ram and Lakshaman, and to counter his arrows, two brothers also 
covered the sky with their swift arrows. They also caused injury to invisible Indrajeet, as 
was evident from their blood soaked shafts falling down. The demon had created dense 
cover of fog around himself, and because of this his chariot was not visible at all. Ram 
and Lakshaman very skillfully maintained showering swiftly the arrows in the same 
direction from which the demon’s arrows were seen coming. 

Fed up of his treacherous sorcery, Lakshaman sought the permission of Ram to charge 
brhamashtr but Ram prevented him. 

Finding Ram and Lakshaman fully vigilant, Indrajeet went back to Lanka. 

6-81 Killing of fake Sita (34 / 3673) 

While being in Lanka, Indrajeet was reminded of death of eminent warriors. Getting 
overwhelmed with their memory, he arrived over the battle ground from the westen gate 
of the city. This time he had fake Sita sitting in the back of his chariot. 

Finding him back to fighting, monkeys lead by Hanuman rushed towards him. Hanuman 
saw Sita sitting over his chariot. He was surprised, and looked at her carefully and could 
see the same Sita whom he had met in ashok vatika, “Single lock of hair, drooped down 
gaze, pale face, soiled sari etc.” 


35 Shlok 23-26 of sarg 73 of yuddh kand have been used verbatim to describe the oblation sarifce of Indrajeet in 
this sarg 80, shlok 7-10. 

36 Quivers on either shoulder projecting upward, flanking the head in the centre, gave an impression of 
three hoods. 


Page 58 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


When Indrajeet openly dragged Sita by her hair, Hanuman burst into anger, “Fool! 
Touching Sita by hair would soon bring your end. Being born in the glorious lineage of 
sage Pulastya, you are a demon indeed. Assaulting of women is prohibited in 
scriptures.” 

While Hanuman charged rocks heavily over him, he prevented with his sharp arrows the 
movement of the monkeys. 

Indrajeet justified his action, “All actions are permitted to subdue the enemy.” Pulling his 
sword, he attacked over Sita and servered her body in two parts diagonally from left 
shoulder down to right abdomen. This pained Hanuman to the core of his heart. While 
monkeys were shocked, demons rejoiced the killing. 

6-82 Hanuman fought valiantly (28 / 3701) 

Hanuman was in great wrath and encouraging the fleeing monkeys he swooped over 
demons. Large score of casualty of demons, caused Indrajeet to fight with the monkeys. 
Hanuman huled a rock mass with high momentum over Indrajeet, but his charioteer 
saved him by shifting the chariot swiftly. 

Although there was large scale carnage of demons, Hanuman was down with the shock 
of losing Sita. He asked the monkeys to withdraw, “What is the use of fighting? When 
Sita is no more, what to do with this Lanka!. Let us go back and intimate Ram 
accordingly.” 

Indrajeet getting back to Lanka commenced ygya in the temple of goddess nikumbhila 
for the welfare and progress of demons race. 

6-83 Wailing Ram (44 / 3745) 

Ram heaing the great tumult of fighting, advised Jambvan to go and assist Hanuman. 
While Jambvan reached the western gate, he found Hanuman and other monkeys on 
the return journey. Coming to Ram, Hanuman broke the news of killing of Sita by 
Indrajeet over the battle ground. 

No sooner he heard this than he dropped unconscious over ground. Monkeys made 
several efforts by spraying fragrant water over his face but he didn’t recover. 

While holding him in his arms, Lakshaman spoke, “The concept of dharm 
(righteousness) and adharm (sin) does not have any base. Those involved in adharm 
are seen flourishing. For example, Ravan being fully involved in adharm is the owner of 
Lanka and gods are subservient to him. On the other hand observing dharm you are in 
trouble. Arth (wealth) has a great role in life. For dharm of honoring the father’s words 
you had disowned the state of Ayodhya. What I see that purusharth (j^tt?t adventure) is 
only rewarded in this life, whether it is performed through dharm or adharm." 


Page 59 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Concluding, Lakshaman mentioned, “Whatever I have spoken is intended only to 
encourage you and discard sorrow.” 

6-84 Vibhishan consoled Ram (23 / 3768) 

Vibhishan had the responsibility of putting up the monkeys to their specified location 
around gates of Lanka, after close of the day’s fighting. Completing the assignment, 
when he came back with his companion demons, he saw Lakshaman in sorrow and 
tears, while unconscious Ram was lying in his lap. 

He enquired, “What has happened?” Lakshaman replied, “Hanuman has brought the 
news that Indrajeet has killed Sita .” Vibhishan immediately termed this as baseless and 
totally false. He continued, “This could never happen. The fatuation of Ravan over Sita 
would never allow Indrajeet to do this. It is a magical trick to divert our attention. He must 
have gone to goddess nikumbhila’s temple for performing oblations. Once he completes 
his mission of oblation, he would emerge invincible. We have to be quick, and with 
Lakshaman we need to go and disrupt his mission.” 

Saying this, he sought immediate permission of Ram for dispatching Lakshman without 
any loss of time with select group of monkeys. 

6-85 Lakshaman at nikumbhila temple (36/ 3804) 

Ram was so much immersed in sorrow that he couldn’t hear Vibhishan’s words properly. 
He asked him to repeat his words. As desired Vibhishan repeated his view point, “It was 
all a diverting trick of Indrajeet because he must have been trying to complete the 
oblations in the nikumbhila temple.” 

Vibhishan further revealed, “Indrajeet has been gifted by Brahma one potent brahmshir 
weapon, and swift horses. Brahma had also mentioned that while offering oblation in 
nikumbhila temple, if your oblation is interrupted by some body he will be your killer. In 
order to interrupt his mission Lakshaman has to move there with his army. He must have 
been performing his ygya surrounded by strong demons’ army." Vibhishan also 
mentioned, “This would help bring Lakshaman to bring about the end of his life today.” 

Ram agreed to his proposal and advised Lakshaman to be alert and eliminate the 
demon. He also advised Vibhishan to accompany Lakshaman in addition to monkey 
army. 

Lakhaman offered his respect in the feet of Ram and moved to Nikumbhila temple. 
Accompanied by Hanuman, Sugriva, Vibhishan and other monkeys, he arrived at the 
destination in time. 


Page 60 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-86 Operation nikumbhila (35 / 3839) 

Coming close to nikumbhila, Vibhishan pointed out to Lakshaman, “Look at the cloud like 
cordoing of nikumbhila. This is the army of demons, and this has to be cleared before 
you reach Indrajeet inside offering oblations." Soon the monkeys swooped over the 
demons. Fierce fighting took place. When Indrajeet learnt about attack of monkeys, 
leaving his mission inconclusive, he rode the chariot and moved out to face the 
monkeys. Hanuman in the meanwhile was engaged in causing great casualty to the 
demons army. To contain Hanuman’s spree, Indrajeet arrived near him. When he was 
there, Vibhishan pointed out to Lakshaman about the presence of Indrajeet in the 
chariot. Lakshaman took a look at the demon sitting in the chariot. 

6-87 Cordoning of the banyan tree (30 / 3869) 

Soon Vibhishan piloted Lakshaman through a dense forest, and they arrived at a large 
banyan tree. Vibhishan pointed out, “Indrajeet offers his daily oblation here before 
leaving for battle ground. Before he comes here, you have to initiate your attack and kill 
him.” 

Lakshaman was ready with his bow, and stretching the string he produced terrible 
sound. In the meanwhile Indrajeet arrived there. Lakshaman challenged him for combat. 
Before he responded, looking towards Vibhishan he spoke, “You have been born and 
brought up in the royal palace. You are my uncle, but I am surprised to see how you 
turned treacherous to us. Leaving the loyalty to Lanka, you have become a doll in the 
hand of the enemy. Your this act shall always be condemned. Only close family 
members knew about this place, and it is you who have brought Lakshaman here.” 

Vibhishan replied him, “Although I am born in a demon’s house I didn’t carry the sinful 
impressions of the demons. I did never indulge in immoral deeds. Your father has 
abducted other’s wife, and it is a great sin. To grab other’s wealth, wife and doubt over 
one’s own kith and kin are thee great sins. You are known for your impudence. Today 
you won’t be able to access the banyan tree and shall be soon killed. Lanka, your father 
and you shall be eliminated, there is no doubt in it.” 

6-88 Lakshaman fought Indrajeet (77 / 3946) 

Looking towards Lakshaman, Indrajeet spoke, “It seems you have forgotton the injury of 
my arrows. To day I would soon dispatch you to the death world.” Lakshaman replied, 
“Its no use prattling. You are a treacherous, and the other day you ran away from the 
ground. Let us see the current situation, and I invite you to use all your skills on me.” 

Indrajeet showered sharp shafts over Lakshaman who was riding over the shoulder of 
Hanuman. Lakshaman countered his arrows and shot several arrows over him. Both 
used deadly shafts on each other. Indrajeet caused injury to Vibhishan, Lakshaman, and 
Hanuman, but Lakshaman was not disturbed at all. Lakshaman charged an arrow which 


Page 61 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


broke shield of Indrajeet. Thereafter, Lakshaman’s further shafts caused grievous injury 
over his body. 

6-89 Indrajeet lost charioteer and horses (53 / 3999) 

The fighting had culminated to such an extent that Vibhishan couldn’t restrain himself, 
and taking a bow and arrows, he also commenced fighting with the demons. He shot 
several deadly arrows over the demons causing several casualties. At the same time, he 
exhorted the monkeys, “Don’t miss this golden chance. Scores of eminent demons have 
already been killed. Indrajeet is the only twinkling star of Ravan’s reserve force. You 
have to be offensive in eliminating the balance army assisting him here. He is son of my 
brother, and therefore is my son. Whenever I pick up an arrow to charge over him, tears 
well up in my eyes. Therefore, he is at the disposal of Lakshaman only." 

Hearing Vibhishan, monkeys renewed their attack over demons. Hanuman also dropped 
down Lakshaman over ground and joined the killing spree of demons army. 

While Indrajeet and Lakshaman continued their fight, the multitude of arrows covered the 
entire sky to horizon. There was no light, sun was not visible. Wind went still, and fire 
lost the ignition. Sages were worried about the earth and wished wellbeings of the all the 
beings. Lakshaman using four sharp arrows injured the horses of Indrajeet, and with 
another shaft killed the charioteer. Indrajeet himself took the reign of the chariot, and 
continued fighting. When he held reign, Lakshaman targeted his hands and injured 
them. When he engaged his hands on bow and arrows, Lakshaman continued causing 
injury to the horses. It was an exciting scene, and four monkeys Pramathi, Sharabh, 
Rabhas, and Gandhamadan taking advantage of the constraint of Indrajeet, jumped over 
the horses. Under their heavy weight, the horses fell down and collapsed. Those 
monkeys swiftly and safely quit the place. 

Indrajeet was without chariot, and he came down over ground. He rushed on foot to 
Lakshaman showering arrows over him. Lakshaman continuing countering his arrows, 
caused grievous injuries over his body. 

6-90 Indrajeet eliminated (94 / 4093) 

Indrajeet, losing his chariot felt great constraint in warfare. In the meanwhile, he 
encouraged his fellow demons to continue fierce fighting, and create a magical situation 
to allow him to escape and comeback with a new chariot. While demons kept the enemy 
engaged, Indrajeet retuned back riding a new chariot. Coming back, he caused great 
casualties of monkeys. 

Lakshaman observed the sense of panic over the face of monkeys. He very swiftly cut 
down the bow of Indrajeet. When he picked up another bow, Lakshaman shooting three 
arrows again cut down that bow also. Lakshaman shot five deadly shafts over his chest 
and caused him to vomit blood. He again picked up a new bow of strong string, and 
showered arrows over Lakshaman. All his arrows were easily countered by Lakshaman. 


Page 62 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


With one arrow to each demon, Lakshaman hit them grievously. Finding opportunity, 
Lakshaman killed the charioteer of Indrajeet. It was strange to notice that in absence of 
the charioteer, the horses maintained their faultless movement. Lakshaman taking target 
of the horses, continued injuring them. Indrajeet shot ten deadly arrows over the chest 
of Lakshaman, but due to impregnable shield Lakshaman was fully safe. Noticing that, 
Indrajeet shot three shafts over his forehead. Bearing with his assault, Lakshaman shot 
five arrows to injure his face and ears. 

Indrajeet injured the face of Vibhishan by three arrows, and he also injured all the 
monkeys by shooting one arrow to each of them. Vibhishan was angry and taking his 
mace he killed the horses of Indrajeet. In absence of charioteer and horses, Indrajeet 
joined the fight on foot. He charged trident over Vibhishan, but Lakshaman cut that into 
pieces. Vibhishan used his bow, and shot five heavy shafts over chest of Indrajeet which 
caused grievous injury to him. Enraged Indrajeet, loaded Yam shaft over the string 
having target on Vibhishan. 

Lakshaman immediately countered that, using a shaft as he had instructions by kuber in 
a dream. Lakshaman shot varun astr which was countered by Indrajeet by Rudr astr. 
The agrii astr of Indrajeet was countered by surya astr of Lakshaman. Indrajeet in 
retaliation shot asur astr which produced innumerable deadly tridents, clubs, and maces. 
Lakshaman countered that with maheswar astr. 

The sky was occupied by sages and other celestial beings to watch the deadly and 
fierce fighting between Lakshaman and Indrajeet. Lakshaman took out a brilliant shaft 
and loading over the string invoked his potential, “Ram has no parallel in righteousness, 
O, shaft! Go and kill Indrajeet now.” 

The fire like shaft hit the demon, and severed his head off the body. Indrajeet was dead 
and his bow fell apart. 

This was a moment of great joy among monkeys. The remaining demons deserted the 
ground searching their hiding place inside Lanka. The celestial beings and sages 
rejoiced the end of Indrajeet. Gods produced sweet sound from the celestial trumpets. 
With the end of Indrjeet, auspiciousness dawned over earth. The sky became clear, cool 
wind permeated the environment. Monkeys rushed to Ram and informed him about the 
end of Indrajeet. 

6-91 Rejoicing of monkeys (29 / 4122) 

After killing Indrajeet, Lakshaman rushed to meet Hanuman and Jambavan. They 
immediately moved to Ram amidst joyous uproar of the monkeys. While moving, 
Lakshaman was flanked by Hanuman and Vibhishan. Coming to Ram, Lakshaman 
bowed his head over Ram’s feet and stood on his side as if Upendra ( vaman bhagwan ) 
had stood by Indr (6-91-4). Vibhishan spoke to Ram, “Lakshaman has killed Indrajeet by 
cutting asunder his head.” Elated Ram dragged Lakshaman in his lap, and smelling his 


Page 63 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


head with affection, he continued looking at his face. He mentioned, “End of Indrajeet 
means end of battle.” 

Lakshaman had grievous wounds over his body. The arrows were lying stabbed and 
they caused pain. Ram sent for Sushen (one of the chiefs of the monkeys 6-91-24) and 
asked him to treat Lakshaman, Vibhishan and others who suffered from the stabbed 
arrows. Through the consistent efforts of three days and nights (6-91-16) of Vibhishan, 
Hanuman and others Indrajeet could be killed. 

Sushen gave a medicinal drop in the nose of Lakshaman, and its fragrance caused the 
automatic surfacing of the arrows by self healing of the wounds. Similar treatement was 
done to all who had suffered from stabs of arrows. 

6-92 Sorrowful Ravan (68 / 4190) 

The ministers of Ravan, before breaking the news personally visited the ground and 
confirmed the end of Indrajeet. Coming to Ravan they mentioned, “With the assistance 
of Vibhishan, Lakshaman has ended the life of Indrajeet." 

Ravan was extremely grieved with the news of end of Indrajeet. He had a long spell of fit 
and on recovery he wailed loudly, “O, Indrajeet! You had prevailed upon Indr, how did 
you fall prey to Lakshaman? In your absence the sages and celestial beings shall relax 
in slumber. The entire earth looks deserted to me. The thorn of my chest, Ram, 
Lakshaman and Sugriv are still alive. Why did you quit me so early? I should have 
preceded you in death, but the reverse has happened.” 

Lamenting thus it occurred to him, “Indrajeet had killed fake Sita over battle ground. Let 
me make it real.” He rushed with a sword in his hand to kill Sita. His ministers persuaded 
him to desist from such an act but he didn’t listen and arrived in ashok vatika. 

Sita was scared to see him coming. She thought, “He is coming to kill me. Could be he is 
coming to convey that Ram and Lakshaman had been killed. If the latter is true, how 
unfortunate I am! What shall happen to Kausalya whose only son is killed because of 
me. Curse to Manthra ! Because of her, Kausalya shall have to bear news of end of her 
son.” 

In the meanwhile, Suparshv, dared to intervene, and spoke to Ravan, “You had 
maintained celibacy, attained the knowledge of veda, and ruled efficiently over earth. To 
kill a woman is a condemnable sin. You should take revenge from Ram and possess 
her after killing him. Today is 14 th day of the dark fortnight (6-92-66), and tomorrow, on 
amavasya day, move for the victory over Ram.” 

Good sense prevailed upon Ravan, and he returned back to the palace. 


Page 64 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-93 Ram killed demons army (39 / 4229) 

Agitated Ravan asked his ministers, “Let entire army be sent to battle ground today with 
the sole intention to kill Ram. Go and collectively surround Ram from all sides. Eliminate 
him today itself. If he survives today’s attack I would kill him tomorrow.” 

As commanded by Ravan the entire army of demons stormed over the battle ground. 
They were riding horses, elephants, and chariots. Beside, large contingent of infantry 
had also been engaged in fighting. They were equipped with all sorts of weapons 
including tridents, spears, swords, clubs, maces, bows and arrows. 

Monkeys were equally excited and took them boldly. Hurling of rocks and trees, wielding 
of swords, spears, flying arrows marked the sky over the battle ground. The casualties 
were so high that full depth streams and rivers of blood were formed. Like wooden logs 
the corpses were carried in the blood stream. The wreckage of elephants and chariots 
made the banks, the arrows looked like fish, and fallen flags were trees of the banks. 

Demons were so barbarous that some monkeys took refuge to Ram. Interfering in the 
fierce fighting Ram used gandharv astr (6-93-26). Hypnotizing the demons, Ram’s 
arrows were seen all pervading. Monkeys looked like Ram to the demons. At times Ram 
was seen alone, and in the following moment, he was seen with his arrows at all places. 
He was not identified at a single location, but his arrows were present at all places. 

Ram’s potential had such a charismatic effect that the ends of his bow were observed to 
be rotating so fast that gave an impression of a moving disc. In fact he himself had 
rotated in all quarters so swiftly that he looked like a rotating disc lying in a vertical plane. 
The disc rotated about a horizontal axis passing through the navel of his body. The 
formation of the disc could be described thus: his navel was the centre of the disc, 
arrows were spokes, bow formed the outer circle, the resonance of the bow string was 
the sound of the disc, and shooting swiftness formed the brilliance of Ram Chakr 37 ((6- 
93-29/30). 

In this way, in only one eighth period of the day, he dealt firmly with the entire demons 
army. He destroyed (6-93-26) ten thousand chariots, eighteen thousand elephants, 
fourteen thousand horses, and two hundred thousand infantry. 

For such a miraculous performance, he was highly greeted by the celestial beings. He 
also mentioned to Sugriv, Vibhishan, Hanuman, Jambvan, Dwvid and Maind who were 
standing on his sides that such a divine power was either inherent with him or with shiv 
in-charge of destruction ( 6 - 93-38 ffet tt htt ) . 


37 Slftr :#r ST7JT Hi^cbl'jcbH. | rMlc[P^ IJ iy'q j t. I I 6-93-29 

Rcqi^yu|L|4n ftuRT gPjTTSFTFT I ^ T PT?TT ^ cbMflcbpM yjff 8 I I 6-93-30 


Page 65 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-94 Wailing demonnesses condemned Shurpanakha (41 / 4270) 

The demonnesses of Lanka mourned the killing of their kith and kin. Lamenting loudly 
they mentioned, “The root cause is Surpanakha, the wretched and devil woman. Being 
ugly and dreadful, how did she dare to solicit relation with handsome and charming Ram 
and his brother Lakshaman! Ram’s potential was well confirmed by elimination of Viradh 
who wanted to grab Sita. Further, he cleared fourteen thousand demons, and their 
captains Khar, Dushan and Trishira from Janasthan. Mighty Kabandh was made 
armless. Terribly strong Vali was killed in one shot. Sugriv had been crowned king of 
Kishkindha only because of him. Kumbhakarn, Atikaya, and Indrajeet have been 
eliminated. Fortunate is Vibhishan that he sought refuge in Ram." 

Condemning ego of Ravan, they narrated, “Pleased by his penance Brahma had 
blessed him immunity against demons, gods and celestial beings. Overwhelmed by his 
ego, he ignored humans (6-94-29)and didn’t seek immunity against them. Ram is 
manifestation of supreme authority to bring about his end. When gods were persecuted 
by Ravan, they approached Brahma, and he assured them, “Demons shall live with 
great fear of their destruction.” Shiv also predicted to gods, “One woman would cause 
end of the entire demons. (6-94-36) ” 

They lamented, “We see the things coming true today. We can’t find any refuge now.” 

6-95 Ravan on battle ground (54 / 4324) 

Ravan heard the loud lamentation of demonesses. Fie pondered over their words and 
commanded, “Ask Mahodar 38 , Mahaparshv, and Virupaksh to prepare for my departure 
to the battle ground.” Soon the preparations were made by calling the demons from each 
house of Lanka to accompany Ravan on battle ground. Over one hundred thousand 
chariots, three hundred thousand elephants, sixty hundred thousand horses, same 
number of camels and asses, and innumerable infantry gathered near the royal palace 
(6-95-28). Ravan moved out riding a sun like brilliant chariot pulled by eight horses. 

On his command Mahodar, Mahaparshv, and Virupaksh followed him riding their 
separate chariots. The movement of the army was greeted by tumultuous sound of 
trumpets. The earth trembled imagining the extent of imminent holocaust. 

Ravan came out of Lanka, using the same gate on which Ram and Lakshaman had 
pitched their camp. His movement was marked by bad omens: stormy wind, stumbling 
horses, darkness around, terrifying noise of the birds and jackals, blood mixed rain, 
perching vulture over flag mast, falling meteorites, defening thunders, pulsating left eye 
and left arm. 


38 Mahodar and Mahaparshv of this sarg are ministers in the royal court of Ravan (ref. 6-99-3), whereas those referred in sarg 70 
were step brothers of Ravan. 


Page 66 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Ignoring the forebodings, he marched ahead and caused great havoc among the 
monkey armies. 

6-96 Sugriv killed Virupaksh (36 / 4360) 

Ravan caused great destruction of monkeys. Finding hardly any resistance, he moved 
towards Ram. Sugriv noticed huge loss of monkeys and he rushed forward to contain 
the demons. He was followed by other monkey chiefs. He began heavy pouring of rocks 
and trees which caused end of scores of demons. Soon he was checked by Virupaksh, 
who leaving his chariot, mounted an elephant. 

Sugriv dashed a tree over the elephant which fell over knees. Virupaksh holding a sword 
jumped over Sugriv. When Sugriv hurled a rock, he ducked that easily. Moving forward 
again, he injured Sugriv who fell in swoon. Recovering soon, he leapt with a tree over 
him, but he escaped the attack, and broke the shield of Sugriv with his sharp sword. 
When Sugriv pounded his fist over him, he again ducked and saved himself. Finding a 
chance, he injured the legs of Sugriv. A little agitated, but soon Sugriv picked up his 
spirit, and punched over his forehead. The demon fell over ground and vomited blood. 
His eyes dilated dreadfully, and he was dead. Monkeys rejoiced the killing, where as 
demons mourned for Virupaksh. 

6-97 Sugriv killed Mahodar (38 / 4398) 

Ravan was shocked to lose Virupaksh. Addressing Mahodar, he mentioned, “I pin my 
great hope upon you. You can turn the scene in our favour.” Accepting the challenge, 
Mahodar joined the fighting with renewed spirit and caused untold misery over monkeys. 
They ran to Sugriv for protection. 

Sugriv soon rushed to Mahodar who was riding a chariot and shooting swift arrows. The 
rocks and trees hurled by Sugriv were easily countered by him. Sugriv found a club 
lying over the ground, and using that club he killed the horses of the chariot. The demon 
jumped with mace in his hand. When both the warriors charged their weapons on each 
other, the weapons were destroyed midway by collision. Both were without weapon, and 
they were engaged in wrestling. That also proved indecisive, and Mahodar picked up a 
sword. Sugriv also happened to locate a sword lying over ground. Both used their 
superb skill to tilt the scale in one’s favour. While Mahodar charged his sword over 
Sugriv’s shield, and he was trying to pull the sword for second charge, Sugriv got a 
chance to cut asunder his head off the body. Mahodar was dead, and that caused great 
shock as well as wrath to Ravan. 

The killing of Mahodar was celebrated by celestials also who watched the battle from 
sky. 


Page 67 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-98 Angad killed Mahaparshv (26 / 4424) 

When Mahaparshv learnt about the death of Mahodar, he lost his balance in anger. 
Riding a large chariot, he showered sharp arrows over monkeys army assisting Angad, 
and caused heavy casualty. Angad moved forward and hurled a heavy club over him. 
The impact of club, brought down the demon along with his charioteer over the ground. 
Jambvan from the nearby picked up a rock mass and crushed his chariot along with the 
horses. 

Coming on foot, the demon showered arrows and injured Angad, Jambvan and 
Gavaksh. Furious Angad picked up a club, and charging heavily over him broke his bow 
and crown together. The demon picked up a bright axe and pounded over left shoulder 
of Angad. Ducking his charge, Anagad punched his clenched fist over his chest. His 
chest was torn apart and that caused the end of Mahaparshv. Monkeys rejoiced the 
killing, while demons were extremely shocked. 

6-99 Ram and Ravan in combat (51 / 4475) 

Ravan spoke to the charioteer, “My ministers Virupaksh, Mahodar, and Mahaparshv 
have been killed. I will not now allow Ram and Lakshaman to live longer. Take me 
forward.” 

He drew a picture of Ramvruksh (6-99- o4 / 05), which he was pledged to destroy 
completely, “I will destroy this great tree, called Ram Tree. This tree has branches of 
Sugriv, Jambvan, kumud, Nal, Dwvid, Maind, Angad, Gandhamadan, Hanuman, Sushen 
and other monkeys. Sita is the flower who causes this tree to bear fruits.” 

When his chariot picked up speed while moving towards Ram, it produced deafening 
sound. Soon he charged tamas astr causing loss of lives of scores monkeys. This shaft 
was the gift of Brahma to Ravan, and monkeys were not able to face this. They took to 
their heels. 

Ram and Lakshaman stood stable and were happy to see him coming towards them. 
Ram produced great resonating sound from the string of his bow, which intensified with 
the sound of arrows of Ravan, caused great havoc among demon armies. 

Lakshaman picked up the chance first, and showered arrows over Ravan. He countered 
them, and proceeding to Ram, showered arrows over him. The sky was filled with 
arrows flying with wings of vultures. While Ram countered them with spear like arrows, 
he shot narach (shafts of annular tips) perching around forehead of Ram in a circular 
order. Undisturbed by narach , Ram shot raudr astr over him which hit his shield. Further, 
Ram injured his forehead by one of terrible arrows. 

The enraged demon, retaliated by charging asur astr producing arrows having dreadful 
tips of meat loving animals and birds, i.e., lions, tigers, dogs, wolves, ass, jackals, crows, 
hawks, vultures, snakes etc. Ram countered them by invoking agni astr producing fire, 


Page 68 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


sun, moon, crescent moon, comet, meteorites, and lightning. Monkeys rejoiced the 
countering of deadly weapons of the demon by Ram and produced sky renting uproars. 

6-100 Lakshaman hit to unconsciousness (62 / 4537) 

Finding futility of his deadly shafts, Ravan invoked a shaft made by mayasur demon. 
This showered varieties of lethal weapons i.e., swords, tridents, maces, pestles etc. over 
the monkeys. Ram countered them by gandharv astr. The demon renewed his attack by 
charging surya astr which produced sharp discs causing casualty to monkeys. Ram cut 
them into pieces and brought relief to the monkeys. 

Ravan shot ten sharp arrows causing injury to Ram’s body. Ram was not agitated, and 
he injured the demon’s body severely by shooting several arrows. In the meanwhile, 
Lakshaman interfered with seven sharp arrows. One of them cut down the flag of the 
demon’s chariot marked with the sign of skull (6-100-14). The second one killed the 
charioteer, and the rest five cut his mighty bow into pieces. Lakshaman was assisted by 
Vibhishan, who used his mace to kill the horses of his chariot. 

Ravan jumping down over ground, charged a radiant shakti over Vibhishan. This was 
countered midway by Lakshaman, well before it could reach Vibhishan. The shakti 
decorated with a gold chain, fell into three pieces over ground. The monkeys rejoiced the 
feat of Lakshaman by producing shrieking sounds. 

Ravan targeting over Vibhishan, picked up another deadly shakti. Seeing terrifying fire 
emitted from the weapon while it was in the hand of the demon, Lakshaman came 
forward shadowing Vibhishan in the background. Lakshaman resumed showering 
arrows over him. Ravan spoke loudly, “Lakshaman, shadowing Vibhishan behind, you 
have saved him, but now I shall end your life.” He hurled that shakti over Lakshaman, 
and produced a terrifying sound. The swift shakti coming on lightning speed, pierced 
deep into Lakshaman’s chest. Ram, sensing the grievousness of the weapon, earnestly 
wished a safe life to Lakshaman. Ram was in deep sorrow, when he saw Lakshaman flat 
over ground. 

“It is time to retaliate, rather than lament”, thinking this Ram asked Hanuman and Sugriv 
to protect Lakshaman from all sides. Lakshaman was lying in pool of blood, and the 
monkeys tried in vain to take out the weapon from his chest. 

With stable mind, while Ram took out the weapon from Lakshaman’s chest, the demon 
continued showering arrows over Ram causing injuries to his body. Taking out the 
weapon from the chest of Lakshaman, Ram broke that into two pieces. 

Undaunted by the critical state of Lakshaman, Ram picked up his fight with the demon, 
and shot several infallible shafts to injure him grievously. Ravan was on foot, and felt 
great constraint in his movement. He was also scared by Ram’s terrible charges, and 
taking to his heels, he rushed back to the city of Lanka. 


Page 69 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-101 Lakshaman revived (56 / 4593) 

While Ram resumed his charges over Ravan, he asked Sushen to initiate treatment of 
Lakshaman at the earliest. Sushen advised Hanuman to bring the herbs used earlier as 
directed by Jambvan, “You are aware of the four varieties of herbs lying over the 
southern end of the Mahodar mountain.” 

Sushen mentioned to Ram, “I notice sign of conscious spirit in Lakshaman’s body. His 
face is fresh, and pulse is active. Lakshaman is bound to revive once the medicines are 
procured.” 

As advised, Hanuman immediately rushed to the destination. Arriving at the specified 
mountain he was not able to identify those medicines, and he preferred to take out the 
mountain itself. Giving three jerks, he uprooted the mountain, and moved fast to Lanka. 

When Ravan ran away, Ram coming close to Lakshaman, and taking him in his lap 
lamented loudly, “You can’t leave me alone. As you had followed me in forest, I would 
follow you in the death world. What happened to your earnest desire to keep advising 
me time and again? Get up, and see my pitiable state. I won’t fight any more. What is 
the use of fighting? One can find other wife, cousins, but one can’t find own brother 
anywhere on this earth (6-101-15).” 

In the meanwhile, Hanuman arrived with the mountain carrying the life saving herbs. 
Sushen picked up the herbs and ground them before use. Once the medicine was put in 
the nostril of Lakshaman, he got up fully fresh, and arrows stabbed in his body 
automatically fell off his body. 

Ram, drawing Lakshaman, embraced him affectionately within his arms and mentioned, 
“I can’t survive your separation. I am fortunate to see you alive. In your absence, getting 
back Sita, and victory were meaningless.” 

Lakshaman quipped back, “How can you lose the main objective of honouring your 
words to Vibhishan for crowing him as king of Lanka? The devil Ravan has to be 
immediately eliminated by your sharp arrows. My only desire is to see him dead today 
only before sun sets in the west.” 

6-102 Ram over celestial chariot (70 / 4663) 

To fulfil Lakshaman’s earnest wish, Ram looked towards the battle ground, and loaded 
his bow with arrow. In the meanwhile, Ravan appeared riding a new chariot. While 
arriving close to Ram, he looked like rahu rushing towards sun. Soon, he commenced 
showering arrows over Ram. 

While Ram countered the demon’s arrows, gods got anxiety about his remaining on foot. 
Hearing gods, Indr immediately dispatched his chariot driven by Matali to Ram. Arriving 
over battle ground, while seated over chariot, with folded hands Matali spoke to Ram, 


Page 70 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


“As desired by Indr, this chariot is meant for you. Kindly accept this gesture, and oblige 
gods. This will facilitate early victory over the demon. The chariot, being pulled by green 
horses, looks like the rising sun. Here lies the mighty bow, brilliant shield, infallible 
arrows, and potent shakti of Indr." 

Ram, gladly mounted the chariot and commenced his attack over the demon. They were 
engaged in fierce fighting. Ravan invoking lethal weapons, continued assaults over Ram. 
It appeared as if Budh mercury) had become inimical to rohini TTT, the beloved 
star of moon (6-102-31), and mars (TTTf) had afflicted favourite vishakha (FTTFTt) stars of 
Ikshavaku dynasty (6-102-35). Ravan appeared to have an edge over Ram. Under the 
swift attack of Ravan, Ram was not able to find time to be aggressive. He cut down the 
flag over Ram’s chariot, and injured Matali as well as the horses. Gods and celestial 
beings were down with anxiety. 

Picking up a potent spear, Ravan charged over Ram, and mentioned, “This will bring 
about your instant end.” Ram noticed the brilliant and deadly weapon speeding towards 
him. He tried his arrows but they failed to counter the demon’s spear. Soon Ram picked 
up Indr’s shakti lying in the chariot, and the demon’s spear was countered successfully. 
Continuing his assault with arrows, Ram injured his chest as well forehead. He got 
agitated, and expressed his wrath through his broad eyes. 

6-103 Ravan driven out safely (31 / 4694) 

Ravan resumed the showering of arrows and injured Ram badly. Although Ram was 
injured, he was not agitated. He maintained his spirited attack over the demon. It was 
such a gloomy combat, that the arrows had covered the sky stealing away the light from 
the battle ground. 

Ram rebuked Ravan, “Fool! Coward! In my absence you abducted Sita and assume 
yourself very valorous. Had I been present, you would have gone to the abode of your 
brother Khar. Fortunately today you are here to face me, and I would see that vultures 
would soon feast upon your body.” 

Subsequently auspicious signs appearing to Ram indicated happy moments ahead. 
Ram’s hands were automatically picking up potent arrows and continued shooting over 
the demon. Ravan was puzzled, and with drooped face he was not able to fire the fresh 
shots. He was motionless in the chariot. His charioteer sensed the critical situation and 
very skilfully and safely, drove him away. 

6-104 Ravan back to the battle ground (27 / 4721) 

When Ravan noticed being taken away by his charioteer from the battle ground, he burst 
out, “You have defamed me by taking my chariot away from the fighting front. Without 
learning about my intention, how did you decided to quit the front. I suspect your loyalty, 
and it seems you have become an agent of my enemy. You have worked like an enemy. 

I wonder how did you turn ungrateful to me.” 


Page 71 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


The charioteer in sweet words convinced Ravan, “A charioteer has a great responsibility. 
He needs to be alert on time and place of fighting. Neither I am an agent of Ram, nor 
your enemy, nor have I become ungrateful. When I noticed sign of tiredness on you, and 
the horses were also stumbling, I withdrew to revive the freshness. I am clear in my 
intentions. I await your command now.” 

Ravan was satisfied with his answer, and he rewarded the charioteer with a precious gift 
of his armlet. He asked him to take his chariot to the front immediately, and he was 
immediately brought to face Ram. 

6-105 Adityahrudaya jTITTyTqTT (31 / 4752) 

While Ram stood on the battle ground, and Ravan’s chariot was about to approach, 
sage Agastya appeared and spoke to Ram, “I advise you to invoke the blessings of sun 
god by reciting his glory. This is contained in the holy scripture called adityahruday 
Tnfefiarr . 

This augers auspiciousness and brings about victory. Sun god is ever powerful, 
enlightens the world, and invariably rises every day. 

You offer your respect to him by reciting mantr. 

TT I 
WTTTT I 
TTPf TT I 

fTcI Md TT I 
'TFTTRTT I 

All the gods are his manifestation. He maintains the brilliance and energy among all the 
creatures of the world. His rays provide nourishment to the entire world, and he causes 
the occurrence of seasons. 

He is known by several names and let there be reverential salute to all of them: 

aditya (Tfifer son of aditi ), 
savita (■nicmi creator of universe), 
surya (’JT all pervading), 
khag (trr wanderer of sky), 
pusha ( 1 jqT provider of nourishment), 
gavastiman brilliant), 

suvam sadrush golden), 

bhanu (TTJ provider of light), 
hirany reta (f^TTTr seed of creation), 

divakar ending night’s darkness creator of day’s light ), 

haridashva all pervading carried by green horses), 


Page 72 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


sahashrarchi (-mfyjim has thousands of rays), 
saptsapti ('i'd'iM carried by seven horses ), 


marichiman (’Flf^PTR. enhanced by rays), 

timironmathan (hho^F-Ff destroyer of darkness), 

shambhu genesis of auspiciousness ), 

twasta (^T destroyer of afflictions, or destroyer of world), 

martandak (Hid’^cb life provider to world), 

anshuman (3Tg i fR possessor of rays ), 

hirnyagarbh (fiPwPT brahma , one who conceives gold), 

shishir natural comforter), 

tapan heat generator ), 

ahaskar (3T?F3F sun), 

ravi subject of solicitation), 

agnigarbh one who conceives fire ), 

aditiputr (irfJFTTT son of aditi), 

shankh (sfw blissful and all pervading), 

shishimashan (filfi'FTT^R destroyer of cold), 

vyomnath (sjFHP-f master of sky ), 

tamobhedi destroyer of darkness), 

rig yaju sam parag (Wf FTW T7 T§ knower of ved), 

ghanvrishti (HRffe cause of downpour), 

apanmitr (SMFPr one who creates water), 

vindhya vithi plavangam sky wanderer), 

atapi (3flwqT generator of heat), 

mandali (%sff holder of rays garland), 

mrutyu ( ^ cause of death ), 

pingal (f^FM yellowish hued), 

sarvtapan (WTFR heater to all), 

kavi (^jft knower of time), 

viswa (FF’a uinversal), 

mahatejasvi ( Hsid-d J 4l most brilliant ), 

rakt (TfR red hued), 

sarvavavodava genesis of all), 

naksharagrahamtaranamadhip {^'^pj?7WYW\\ r dd 

master of stars), 

tejsamapi tejaswi (^FTRN d-i^l most radiant), 
dwadsatma ( graviFTT manifest in twelve forms ). 


Bow down to purvgiri ( T jaFTP r ) east rising, and pashchimgiri FTP) setting west. Bow 
down to the master of stars, and lord of the day. 


Page 73 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


You are victory itself, and provider of victory. You are carried by seven green horses, I 
bow down time again. You are adorned with thousands of rays, bow down to you time 
and again. You are son of aditi, bow down to you. 

Destroyer of sinner, valorous and swift mover, causes blossoming of lotus, bow down to 
you. 

You are master of bramha, shiv, and Vishnu. You are known as sur, radiance is your 
wealth, you are full of light, fire is your manifestation, you are capable of destruction to 
all. You assume rudr form. I bow down to you. 

You are destroyer of ignorance and darkness, you destroy inertia and cold, you are 
destroyer of enemy, you are beyond measure, you are destroyer of those who are 
ungrateful, you are master of all sorts of light, and you are divine. I bow down to you. 

You radiance is like molten gold. You destroy ignorance, you create world, destroyer of 
darkness, direct manifestation of light, and witness to world. I bow down to you. 

Agasty further emphasised, “Sun is creator, protector and destroyer of all the beings. His 
rays cause heat and rain. He is all pervading, and is ever awake even if others sleep, 
and is culmination of all fire oblations. He is god of sacrifices, and provider of rewards. 
One who chants his glory, his misery, and fear are eliminated. You should concentrate 
on chanting of his glory. Repeat it three times. Victory will be yours. You will kill Ravan 
now.” 

Saying thus, Agasty disappeared. Ram performed the ritual of cleaning hands, feet and 
mouth, and chanted the glory three times facing towards sun. He became fearless and 
bold. 

Sun god was present among gods in sky. He gladly assured Ram, “Do it forthwith. 
Victory to you." 

6-106 Forebodings on battle ground (36 / 4788) 

The charioteer of Ravan drove the chariot very fast which was full of all the lethal 
weapons. The black horses were pulling it. The chariot was shining like sun. Horses had 
been decorated with golden chains. Flags and festoons enhanced the beauty of the 
chariot. The bow in the hand of Ravan was attractive like a rainbow. 

When Ram saw the chariot coming close to him, he spoke to Matali, “You are expert in 
chariot driving. You need to drive very fast as you had been doing with Indr. I want to 
concentrate to kill this demon now, therefore I won’t be giving you any instruction." He 
also advised Matali not to take his advice as a teaching, rather it was meant to prepare 
him for sharing his self assumed responsibility. 

Matali drove the chariot keeping Ravan’s chariot on right. The movement of the chariot 
created so much of dust that Ravan got annoyed and he began showering arrows over 
Ram. 

Soon there appeared numerous bad omens indicating end of Ravan, “Wherever Ravan’s 
chariot moved, it faced harsh and reverse wind. Vultures kept hovering over his chariot. 
Jackals wailed staring in the face of Ravan. Blood drops precipitated over his chariot. 


Page 74 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Meteorites fell over his army. Sun looked pale. Lanka gave an impression of an ignited 
city. Clamouring birds fell over his chariot. Horses wept and their thighs flashed with fire. 

Ravan ignored the forebodings and continued his attack. Contrary to this, Ram felt 
excited and spirited and was confident of victory. 

6-107 Fierce fighting of Ram and Ravan (67 / 4855) 

When both Ram and Ravan faced each other on the fighting front, army of both the 
sides remained a mute spectator. The combat was so captivating that neither demons 
used any of their weapons, nor monkeys hurled any rock and tree missile. They riveted 
their gaze on the fighting heroes. Ram and Ravan were determined over their objective, 
“Ram was confident of victory, and Ravan was sure of his end (6-107-07 jiciciiftfri 
TTT^TT •rT-dHH W T S ) 

Ravan tried to cut down the flag from Ram’s chariot, but his arrow fell short of the 
destination. His assault over Matali didn’t cause any injury to him. Taking retaliatory 
initiatives, Ram cut down the Ravan’s flag. Ram used the bow and arrows of Indr which 
were brought in the chariot by Matali (6-106-17). 

The celestial horses pulled Ram’s chariot, and therefore, none of Ravan’s arrow could 
cause any harm to them. 

The arrows of Ram and Ravan covered the entire sky. Hardly any space was visible 
without any arrow. 

At one point of time, Ram caused Ravan’s horses to backtrack several steps which 
enraged Ravan. He charged lethal arrows over Matiali but he remained unscathed. Ram 
taking the opportunity, filled Ravan’s chariot with arrows. In retaliation, Ravan shot 
maces and pestles but Ram countered them. 

Ram used a potential arrow which cut down the head of Ravan, but soon another head 
cropped up. Ram repeated this operation hundred times, but each time Ravan got new a 
new head. Ram had an anxiety of killing him, for he used all the arrows used earlier to 
kill Khar and Vali but none worked over Ravan. 

6-108 End of Ravan (34 / 4889) 

Matali politely submitted to Ram, “The time of Ravan’s end has arrived. Instead of only 
countering his attack, you need to invoke the infallible weapon of Brahma.” 

Ram was reminded of the possession of a bow which he had received from sage 
Agasty. Initially it was gifted by Brahma to Indr. The arrow was invested with the speed 
of wind, brilliance of fire and sun, body of sky, and gravity of meru and mandarachal. 
Ram loaded that arrow on the string and shot it targeting Ravan. The moment it left the 
bow of Ram, it created huge ecological disturbance. The deadly arrow drove deep in the 
Ravan’s chest. Coming out blood soaked, it entered the earth, and then came back in 
the quiver of Ram. 

Ravan was killed, and he fell down the chariot over ground. His crown and bow lied 
scattered around him. Gods, gandharv and celestial beings were overjoyed to see the 
end of the devil. They showered flower over Ram (6-108-28), and celestial trumpets 


Page 75 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


sounded sweet musical notes. The horizon was clear of dust. Pleasant, cool and 
fragrant breeze blew steadily. 

Monkeys were uproarious with glory to Ram, and demons ran away to take shelter in 
Lanka. Sugriv, Vibhishan, Angad and Lakshaman greeted Ram with reverential 
offerings. 

6-109 Wailing Vibhishan (25 / 4914) 

When Vibhishan saw the dead body of Ravan lying over ground he was seized by deep 
sorrow. His eyes were full of tears. He wailed and lamented loudly, “You always enjoyed 
royal luxuries, how you are lying over bare ground today! Alas! The misfortune arrived 
today. None from Prahast, Kumbhakarn, Indrajeet and you paid heed to my words. With 
your death sun has fallen over ground, moon has dipped deep in darkness, and flaming 
fire has faded out. The world is devoid of strength.” 

Vibhishan portrayed various pictures of his personality. Comparing him with a tree he 
mentioned, “You were like a tree having leaves of courage, flowers of obstinacy, stem of 
penance, and root of valour. This has been uprooted today by stormy wind like Ram.” 

Characterising him as elephant, he said, “Radiance was the tusks, heritage was the 
strong back, anger was the legs, and regal pleasure was the trunk. He is crushed today 
by lion like Ram.” 

Depicting him like fire, he spoke, “Excitement and splendour were flames, breath was 
smoke, and might was the brilliance. He is extinguished today by raining cloud like 
Ram.” 

Describing his bull like actions, he said, “Demon army was tail, hump and horns; he 
acted like wind in showing valour and courage; alertness was eyes and ears. He is 
killed today by a tiger like Ram.” 

Ram reminded Vibhishan, “He had attained the status worthy of a warrior. If a warrior 
sacrifices his life in fighting, it is not proper to lament for him. Victory is not a prisoner of 
one person. It keeps on tilting from one side to other. Today he is not dead, rather he 
has embraced the death boldly. He was never afraid of death. Don’t lament anymore for 
such a great valour.” 

Vibhishan spoke again, “Earlier none of the demons, and gods could face him, but 
today he is lying over ground as if sea has become placid and motionless. He has gifted 
fabulously, enjoyed the royal luxuries, fed his attendants, favoured his friends and 
avenged with enemies. He offered oblations to fire, conducted sacrifices, performed 
penance and was knower of scriptures. Today his soul is wandering for transformation. 
I seek your permission to do his last rites.” 

Ram readily consented and advised Vibhishan to make all necessary arrangements for 
his immediate rites, “Enmity was when he was alive. Upon his death, that feeling is 
gone. Now his soul is affectionate to me also, as it is affectionate to you.” 


Page 76 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-110 Wailing wives of Ravan (26 / 4940) 

When the news of Ravan’s end reached Lanka, his wives came out to the battle ground. 
They were tried to be held back but couldn’t stop and rushed to the ground searching 
the corpse of Ravan. Passing through several dead bodies, they could identify the huge 
black body of the demon king Ravan. 

Some of them, touched his body with respect, some fell over his arms, while others fell 
on ground in swoon. They lamented loudly, “You behaved so wilfully that didn’t pay 
attention to anybody. Had you heeded to Vibhishan’s advice, we would not have been 
made widow today. With your obstinacy, you destroyed the entire race." 

6-111 Last rites of Ravan (124 / 5064) 

Mandodari, the chief of the queens, was one among the wailing crowd of Ravan. She 
mentioned loudly, “When you used to be overwhelmed with anger, even Indr couldn’t 
dare to face you. Today being humiliated by Ram, a human being, you are lying on 
ground, don’t you feel ashamed of this? How did an ascetic kill the mighty conqueror of 
three worlds? I am sure Ram is not a human being. He is lord Vishnu Himself, the 
master of the entire universe. There is no beginning or end of Him. He is beyond all gods 
and beings, supreme spirit and transcendent to darkness of ignorance. He holds conch, 
disc, and mace. His chest is adorned with icon of sri (splendour) and vatsa (humility). 
Goddess Lakshmi always remains with Him (6-111-11 / 14). He has been assisted by 
gods disguised as monkeys. I was convinced about his divinity when I learnt about the 
end of Khar in Janasthan. Later event of Hanuman coming into Lanka which was out of 
bounds to gods, confirmed the superiority of Ram.” 

Describing about Sita Maondodari mentioned, “You longed for her for your self 
destruction only. She is a chaste lady superior to rohini (spouse of moon), and arundhati 
(consort of Vashishath). She is role model of tolerance superior to earth. Her grace and 
compassion is hallmark of goddess Lakshmi. Your passion for her has brought your end. 

I am surprised when you abducted her, how did you escape your end! Probably the 
balance of your penance would have saved you. I am sure Sita is not more beautiful 
than me, but her blind passion lead you to this state of destruction. Sita has huge 
balance of her righteousness that she will enjoy the association of her husband, but my 
balance is over and now I have been turned a widow. When Sita was brought in Lanka 
Vibhishan had predicted the end of Lanka. ” 

Lamenting upon the prevailing condition, she said, “You never paid heed to the soft and 
respectful words of Vibhishan, Kumbhakarn, and Mareech. We were always taken out of 
royal place with due hounor and protocol. Today we all have come on foot, and we 
hardly bothered about our wrappers. It is true that every event happens as destined. 
What shall I do here, in your absence? Why don’t you take me with you on the same 
infinite path which you have preferred to traverse." 

While royal women continued wailing, Ram advised Vibhishan to console the royal 
women and take care of the last rites. Vibhishan submitted to Ram, “I don’t think I should 
perform the last rite of such a sinner who caused destruction of the entire demon race. 
The world will always condemn me for performing his last rites.” Ram tried to reason with 
him, and convinced him to perform the last rites. 


Page 77 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Vibhishan arranged the preparation of a royal carrier to take the body of Ravan to 
cremation ground. The carrier was fully decorated with royal provisions and sandal 
wood. The body of Ravan was laid in rest over a deer skin. Curd and ghee mixed pot 
was put on the south-east corner of his pyre. Yajurvedi Brahmins (6-111-110), following 
the practices of demons dynasty, performed the rituals, and they lead the pyre to the 
south of Lanka, while royal women followed the pyre, until they reached the cremation 
ground. Vibhishan lit the pyre, and on completion of the cremation, he took bath. With 
wet cloth, he offered oblation of kush, til (sesame) and water for the peace of the 
departed soul. Subsequently, he caused the royal women to return to the palace, and he 
himself came to Ram. 

Putting off the bow, quiver and arrows of Indr, Ram attained the state of calmness. 

6-112 Coronation of Vibhishan, and Hanuman to Sita (26 / 5090) 

Celestial beings were extremely happy with the death of Ravan. They returned to their 
abode praising the contribution of Sugriv, Hanuman, Lakshaman, and chastity of Sita. 
Subsequently, Ram bade farewell to Matali, who returned with the chariot to Indr. To 
honour Sugriv, he embraced to his chest. When he looked to Lakhaman, he offered his 
salutation to the feet of Ram. Greeted by monkeys, Ram came back to the camp. 

With a view to coronate Sugriv, as king of Lanka, Ram advised Lakshaman to go and 
complete the function following the customary practices. Lakshaman, asked the 
monkeys to fetch sea water in golden pots and with them he went to Lanka. The 
coronation was performed with vedic rituals. After Lakshaman, demons and monkeys 
sprayed holy water over Vibhishan. To express his gratitude to Ram, Vibhishan chanted 
his glory. 

The citizens of Lanka offered auspicious gifts of curd, rice (3T$TT), sweets, paddy flakes 
(r?twr ifT r^rrrrr) and flowers. Vibhishan brought all those gifts in the service of Ram. 
Seeing the auspicious offer, Ram gladly accepted them. 

To collect the news about Sita, Ram advised Hanuman, “With due consent of Vibhishan, 
go and meet Sita. Convey my wellbeing, and that of Lakshaman and Sugriva to her. 
Intimate her about the death of Ravan. Come back soon with her message." 

6-113 Hanuman back with Sita’s message (53 / 5143) 

As commanded by Ram, Hanuman entered the city of Lanka. He was warmly greeted on 
way, and meeting Vibhshan, he sought his permission to see Sita in ashok vatika. 
Getting the consent of Vibhishan, he moved to ashok vatika , and sent her a prior 
intimation about his arrival. He appeared before her, and found her surrounded by 
demonesses. She was quietly sitting immersed in some thought. Offering his respect to 
her, Hanuman stood on a side. Recognising Hanuman, Sita became glad, but she 
couldn’t speak anything. Hanuman then spoke to her, “Ram and Lakshaman with Sugriv 
are well and they have enquired your wellbeing. With the help of Vibhishan, Ravan has 
been killed, and Lanka is deemed to be under control of Ram. You should now discard 
your sorrow and become happy.” 

Hanuman praised her, “Your vow to maintain chastity and loyalty to Ram, has been able 
to procure today the pleasure of victory. Thus praising the power of her chastity, 


Page 78 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Hanuman further intimated her message of Ram, “I have fulfilled my pledge of your 
liberation. To attain this, I renounced the pleasure of sleep (6-113-11), and putting a 
bridge across the sea, killed the devil demon. The city of Lanka is no longer the home of 
devil Ravan. It has now been offered to Vibhishan. He is excited to see you, and soon he 
would be in ahsok vatika. You should now consider this city as your home." 

Sita still couldn’t speak any word; Hanuman enquired, “Goddess! It seems you are 
immersed in some thought. Please speak.” 

Shedding tear of joy, she spoke to Hanuman, “The joy of victory of my husband has 
choked my voice. I wanted to give you some souvenir, but I don’t have anything with me 
worth giving you. I am afraid, any of the precious materials of this material world, is 
found to be as worthy as this message of victory of Ram.” 

Hearing her, Hanuman spoke, “You are really rare, no one can assess your graceful 
greatness. As regards any gift to me, I am really overjoyed with this victory and your well 
being. I don’t need anything which could enhance my joy further." 

Sita was glad with Hanuman’s devotion and sincerity. Appraising his performances, she 
mentioned, “You are alone who possess all the qualities together: righteousness, healthy 
mind and healthy body, brilliance, endurance, patience, humility, knowledge of scriptures 
and many more (6-113-26 / 28).” 

Finding Sita in good mood, Hanuman sought her permission to penalize those 
demonesses who had been rough to her, “I have seen their misbehaviour with you. I 
want to torture them using my clenched fist, jerk of knees, and kick of foot. I feel like 
breaking their teeth, uprooting their hair, cut their nose and ears, and kill them.” 

Pondering for a while, she forbade Hanuman in doing this, “They are royal attendants, 
and were doing their duty as desired by the king. After the death of the devil, they have 
renounced their past actions of torturing me.” She further quoted scriptures, “A saintly 
person does not allow any erosion in his compassion and righteousness, even if a devil 
continues torturing him. Endurance and forbearance are prime qualities. There is none 
who has not ever erred in his life.” 

Overjoyed by her words, Hanuman sought, “Give me your message for Ram.” 

Sita mentioned, “I crave for holy darshan (glimpse) of Ram who is beloved of devotees 

(6-113-49 -i'-iHYIH 'TTF Tdv-HT'H).” 

Hanuman left assuring her, “Today only you are desire shall be fulfilled.” Coming back to 
Ram Hanuman repeated what conversation he had with Sita. 

6-114 Sita visited Ram (36 / 5179) 

Hanuman submitted to Ram, “The entire battle was to liberate Sita, and the objective 
has now been achieved. As desired by her, kindly allow your darshan to Sita.” 
Pondering over Hanuman’s proposal for a while, Ram spoke to Vibhishan, “Sita should 
be brought here. Before she is brought here, she should be bathed and dressed with 
sandal paste, jewels and proper dress.” 


Page 79 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Vibhishan made preparations of royal palanquin, jewels, cloths and fragraces. Before 
meeting, he sent demoness messenger to inform her about his arrival. Appearing before 
her, he submitted with folded hands, “Accept the jewels and dress brought for you. On 
bathing, dress yourself with sandal, jewels and cloths. The carrier palanquin is ready. 
Ram wants you to see him. ” 

Sita wanted to see Ram without any change in her dress or outfit, but Vibhishan 
intimated her the desire of Ram. When she learnt about the instruction of Ram, she 
happily accepted the proposal. After bath, she dressed herself and mounted the shibika 
(palanquin). 

The demons piloted the movement of her shibika. On her arrival, when monkeys 
scrambled to see her, demons kept them at a distance to clear the crowd. Ram was a 
little agitated to think about her arrival after staying for a long time amidst demons. 

On her arrival to camp, when Vibhishan went to inform Ram, he found him in a 
thoughtful mood. Ram felt a little uncomfortable, when he learnt about her arrival in a 
palanquin. However, he happily mentioned to Vibhishan to ask Sita to come immediately 
to him. 

When Vibhishan and other demons, keeping monkeys at a bay, began clearing the 
route, Ram spoke to Vibhishan, “Monkeys are our own people, and they should not be 
discriminated and deprived from getting a view of Sita. There is no need of maintaining 
privacy. In the time of emergency, marriage, and ygya women are not kept within 
screens. She is coming to her own people, and therefore, she should come walking. This 
will facilitate her glimpse to monkeys.” 

Hanuman, Lakshaman, and Sugriv felt a little uncomfortable to note the apathy of Ram. 
Vibhishan was initially in a dilemma, but as asked by Ram, while Sita walked past the 
standing crowd, Vibhishan escorted her from back. Walking shyly, she came close to 
Ram, and kept gazing at his beaming face. Having seen him to her satisfaction, her face 
blossomed with happiness. 

6-115 Ram showed reservation to accept her (25 / 5204) 

When Sita stood affectionately in front of Ram, he spoke to her, “Your abduction by 
Ravan was an insult to me. To clear the slur from my face, I made all efforts. Today, 
after liberating you, the slur has been cleared. The efforts of Hanuman by crossing sea, 
and burning Lanka to ashes have borne fruit. The support of Vibhishan has also met 
desired success. Previously, the sage Agastya made the south of Vindhya accessible 
after eliminating vatapi and elval, similarly I have now eliminated Ravan (6-115-14)." 

Speaking further to her, Ram mentioned, “Your stay for a long period with demons, 
create doubt about your acceptance. You have been bodily lifted and glanced by Ravan. 
I have reservation in accepting you. I am afraid, if I accept you, this might tarnish the 
clean image of Ikshavaku dynasty. You are free, and you may stay either in the 
protection of Bharat, or Lakshaman, or Sugriv, or Vibhishan. Decision is yours." 

Sita was shocked to hear Ram’s impression about her. She wept bitterly. 


Page 80 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-116 Sita on trial (36 / 5240) 

She felt humiliated with the words of Ram. Wiping her tears, she spoke to him, “I am 
Janaki, born of ygya of Janak from the fold of earth. I didn’t come through a mortal 
human’s womb. I am divine in all respects. After my marriage with you, we stayed 
together for a long period. I am sure you must have understood me fully. On no occasion 
in the past, you had any grievance against me. Although Ravan abducted me, I was 
ever immersed in your thought. He lifted me bodily, and the contact of my body to him, 
was the compulsion of the situation. I never thought of any person other than you. When 
Hanuman visited Lanka, you could have discarded me at that time. Then only I could 
have ended my life, and that could have saved every one of you from taking so much 
pains of bridging sea and fighting demons. Today I hear you speak and express doubt 
on me. This is shorn of proper grace expected from a person like you.” 

Presenting her side frankly, she asked Lakshaman, “Prepare a pyre and I would enter 
the fire. That is the only option to me.” When Lakshaman looked towards Ram, he 
noticed his nod to this proposal. 

The pyre was immediately prepared, and Sita after offering round of respect to Ram, 
moved towards the pyre. Before she stepped into the burning fire, she prayed fire god, 
“If I have protected my chastity, protect me.” Saying thus she entered the fire. The gods, 
sages and other celestial beings were mute witness to her rising to the pyre. Monkeys 
made cry of shock and sorrow. 

6-117 Brahma glorified Ram (32 / 5272) 

When Ram heard the cry of monkeys, he became thoughtful. In the meanwhile, eminent 
gods, Indr, Kuber, Varun, Shiv and Brahma appeared before Ram. With folded hands 
they submitted, “You know everything, and you are genesis of all beings. You are 
beginning, middle and end of all beings. Being Vishnu himself (6-117-6), how do you 
afford to discard Sita? 

Ram addressed them, “I take myself as an ordinary human being, son of Dasarath. You 
may enlighten me.” 

Brahma glorified his supreme divinity, “You are narayan who holds disc, sharang 
dhanush, nandak khadg, and srivats. It is you who redeemed earth as Varah, and 
measured the universe as trivikram. You are vishwaksen (6-117-13 /14), and four 
handed srihari. You have several names: Hrushikesh, Purushottam, Krishna, 
Padmanabh etc. You are eternal universal spirit; truth and righteousness are your 
attributes. I am brahma, and I am your heart; Sarswati is your speech. Ved is from you. 
Fire is your anger. Moon is your happiness. The creation exists in you only. On end of 
the universe, you exist as shesh over cosmic water. You are refuge to all sages. Your 
darshan, and chanting of glory auger ultimate auspiciousness.” 

6-118 Sita sanctified (22 / 5294) 

On completion of Brahma’s chanting of Ram’s glory, Agni (fire god) appeared holding 
Sita in her lap, as a father holds his daughter. Sita looked like a molten gold, resplendent 
like the rising sun. She was exactly identical to the form in which she had entered fire a 
little earlier. Fire god got up, and handed over Sita to Ram, “She is your holy consort, 


Page 81 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


and absolutely free of any blemishes. In her mind, thought, action and speech she never 
turned to anyone other than you. Offer your greeting to her.” 

Ram was glad to see Sita, sanctified by the fire god. With tears in his eyes, he 
mentioned, “As regards me, I was sure of her loyalty and affection to me. I didn’t check 
her while entering fire, only because I knew she will come out sanctified, and that would 
be a firm message to the world about her chastity and true affection to me.” 

Sita was received with a warm welcome, and affectionate greeting. 

6-119 Dasarath turned to Ram (39 / 5333) 

Shiv expressed his greetings to Ram, “By killing Ravan, a great deal of wellbeing of the 
earth has been accomplished. The devil demon was the darkness over the world. His 
elimination has removed that darkness and light pervades in all quarters. 

He continued, “Your father, Dasarath, who had been to Indr lok is now here in sky, sitting 
in an aircraft. Being his son, you have brought auspicious glory to him. You pay respect 
to him with your brother Lakshaman.” 

Ram and Lakshaman immediately offered their respectful salutation to Dasarath. He 
was dressed in an excellent celestial attire. Coming close to Ram and Lakshaman, he 
embraced Ram and took him in his lap. He praised his performances, “You have 
eliminated the enemy, and completed your term of forest. This has earned glory to you. I 
still remember the words of Kaikeyi while sending you in forest. I am proud of you, as 
Kahol, was proud of his son Ashtavakr (6-119-17). I have learnt from gods that by killing 
Ravan, you have established that you are supreme divine spirit. I admire the fate of 
Kausalya who would greet you on your return from forest. The citizens of Ayodhya are 
fortunate that they would enjoy your coronation as monarch of Ayodhya. Bharat has 
deep affection for you. I would be glad to see you together with him. To please me, you 
accepted the forest life of fourteen years. It has now come to end. You have attained 
eternal glory, and now I wish to see you enthroned. ” 

When Dasarath became quiet, Ram sought his blessings to Bharat and Kaikeyi, “When I 
was preparing to leave for forest, you expressed your anguish over them and declared to 
disown them. I seek your favour for being kind on them.” Dasarath consented to his 
proposal and wished to bless them. 

Subsequently, Dasarath looked towards Lakshaman, who, standing with folded hands, 
was waiting for his turn. Embracing him, he mentioned, “By serving Sita and Ram you 
have earned eternal and ineffable glory. Fortunate future be with you.” 

Turning to Sita, Dasarath addressed her as daughter, and mentioned, “You should not 
feel otherwise when Ram announced to discard you. His intention was to prove your 
worth in the eyes of the world. You proved your chastity, and passed the test. No other 
woman dare take such test. You have enhanced your glory." 

Dasarath blessed Ram, Lakshaman, and Sita, and retuned back to Indr lok. 


Page 82 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-120 Indr revived dead monkeys (24 / 5357) 

After Brahma and Shiv, it was Indr’s term. He greeted Ram and enquired, “Do you wish 
anything from me? Ram sought his help in reviving the dead monkeys, “These monkeys 
quitting their family came to help me. I wish, those who have sacrificed their life, let them 
be revived again. Those who have been grievously injured, let them be made healthy. 
When they go back and meet their near and dear one, let there be no dearth of fruits, 
roots and water for them.” 

Indr granted and mentioned, “Although all these demands are tough, but as committed 
let it be immediately fulfilled.” 

Soon the dead monkeys revived, and the injured ones regained their initial physique. 

Other gods collectively greeted Ram, “It is time for you to depart to Ayodhya. We wish to 
see you on throne as a king. Sita has fond affection for you. Let your grace be upon her. 
Bharat is anxious for your return, make him happy.” 

Saluting all the gods, Ram advised everyone including Lakshaman to relax and take 
rest. 

6-121 Vibhishan’s hosting (30 / 5387) 

When the night was over, Vibhishan arrived in the morning with lots of excellent cloths, 
jewels and fragrances to the camp. He submitted to Ram, “I pray you to take holy bath 
and accept these cloths and jewels.” Ram talked about his obligation to Bahrat, “I didn’t 
accept the proposal of Bharat at Chitrakoot under the condition that I would return to him 
in Ayodhya, the very next day of the end of my forest term. Until I meet Bharat, I would 
neither take bath nor accept royal dress. I advise you to greet Sugriv and others with the 
royal provisions.” 

When Ram expressed his concern for constraint of time in reaching Ayodhya, Vibhishan 
assured him, “Pushpak viman of Kuber is in royal possession of Lanka. It was grabbed 
by Ravan for his personal use. It can take you to Ayodhya at your desired speed." 

Vibhishan made earnest request to Ram, “If you consider me worthy of greeting you, 
allow me a chance to host your stay with Lakshaman and Sita for some more time. This 
will give me immense satisfaction.” 

Ram politely turned down his proposal, “I respect your affection, but now I am more 
excited to see Bharat, Kausalya, Sumirtra, and Kaikeyi. Besides this, I am curious to see 
my friend Guh, and citizens of Ayodhya. Don’t ask me to stay a single more moment 
here.” 

Realising urgency of Ram’s departure, Vibhishan invoked pushpak, and it arrived 
instantly. Ram was extremely glad to see the presence of pushpak. It was a magnificent 
aerial chariot decorated with precious gold, silver and gems. Pushpak had facility to 
expand to accommodate as many persons as were on board. 


Page 83 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


6-122 Departure to Ayodhya (27 / 5414) 

Pushpak was ready, decorated with fresh flowers. Seeing Ram excited to move to 
pushpak, Sugriv submitted to him, “What service is due for me?” Ram advised 
Vibhishan, who was standing nearby, “Treat these monkeys who devotedly fought for us 
with ample gift of jewels and gems. They secured the kingdom of Lanka for you. The 
king should be generous in treating the attendants.” 

While Vibhishan treated the monkeys fabulously, Ram, Sita and Lakshaman occupied 
their seat in pushpak. 

In sweet words, Ram advised Sugriv to go to Kishkindha with all the monkeys, and 
Vibhishan to stay in Lanka to look after the well being of the citizens. 

When Ram sought permission to leave for Ayodhya, Vibhishan and Sugriv submitted to 
him, “We also wish to give company to you, and offer our respects in the feet of mother 
Kausalya. We would be fortunate, if we participated in your coronation ceremony. 
Thereafter we will return back to our respective places. 

Ram gladly consented to their proposal. Vibhishan with minsiters, and Sugriva with all 
monkeys (including Hanuman) and bears (Jambvan and others), boarded pushpak. 
There was no scramble for seat over the celestial aircraft, pushpak; everybody was 
comfortably accommodated. 

6-123 Places on way to Ayodhya (57 / 5471) 

When pushpak was airborne, Ram showed Sita various places of interest in Lanka, “ 
This is Lanka city situated on top of trikoot mountain. Here is the place where ashes of 
Ravan lie. And these are the places where other demons kumbhakarn, Indrajeet and 
others were killed. This is the place where we pitched our main camp.” 

As pushpak moved ahead, he showed the bridge set by Nal over sea, “See this vast sea 
full of conch and shells. During Hanuman’s crossing, this is the place where hirnyanabh 
(mainak) mountain rose up in courtesy. This place is setubandh where we pitched our 
camp on the northern shore, and installed mahadev before commencing the construction 
of the bridge. Here only Vibhishan arrived to see me for the first time when he deserted 
Lanka. Setubandh shall be an important pilgrimage place in the future where people will 
offer their worship.” 

Pushpak hovered over Kishkindha, and when Ram pointed out the place where Vali was 
killed, Sita expressed her desire to pick up Tara mother of Angad and wife of Vali, wife of 
Sugriv, and wives of other chiefs of the monkeys to take them to Ayodhya. Pushpak 
landed near the city of Kishkindha. Entering the cave city, Sugriv spoke to Tara, “Let us 
expedite in boarding the wives of the chief monkeys over pushpk, and we will together 
enjoy the stay in Ayodhya, and meet the queens there." 

When they all boarded and met Sita, pushpak rose up, and Ram showed shining 
rishyamook to Sita which was full of precious metals and gold, “This place over the 
mountain, I met Sugriv for the first time and took a vow to kill Vali. This pampa lake, 
down below is full of natural resources in its immediate vicinity. Here I was haunted with 
your sweet memory, and had wailed bitterly. Near its bank, I met Sabari, a great pious 
lady.” 


Page 84 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


As puspak picked up its forward journey, Ram continued acquainting Sita with various 
places connected with their forest life, “This place is dreadful to look at, and here I killed 
Kabandh cutting down his one yojan long arms. This large tree in Janasthan is related to 
Jatayu where for your sake he sacrificed his life. Khar, Dushan, and Trishirawere killed, 
on this place of Janasthan. This is our hermitage from where Ravan abducted you. This 
is Godavari river, and the other place surrounded by banana plants belongs to the sage 
Agastya. Here is Sutikshan’s ashram, and this another place belongs to the saint 
Sharbhang where Indr came to meet him. This is where Viradh was killed. We see now 
those ascetics whom we had met earlier. This is grand hermitage of Atri, where you met 
his holy wife Anusuya. Here is radiant Chitrakoot where Bharat persuaded for our return. 
This grand Yamuna flowing past the green woods, leads us to splendorous ashram of 
Bhardwaj. Tripathga ganga is how lovely to look at! The chirping birds, and Brahmins 
performing their rituals have further enhanced her grandeur. Shringberpur looks very 
attractive, and my bosom friend Guha resides here. Saryu is seen surrounded by 
groves, trees and oblation squares. Here lies the capital city of our father. You have 
come back to Ayodhya after your long stay in forest, salute this city with reverence.” 

There was a scramble among monkeys and demons to have glance of the city of 
Ayodhya full of grand structures, elephants and horses which looked like amaravatipuri 
of Indr. 

6-124 Ram met Bhardwaj (23 / 5494) 

Making an aerial survey, pushpak came back to Yamuna river, and landed down near 
the ashram of Bhardwaj. It was panchami 39 (WIT fdPJ fifth day of the fortnight) and the 
term of fourteen years of exile has ended on this day. Offering due respect to Bhardwaj, 
he enquired, “I wonder whether you have any information about Ayodhya. Is Bharat 
occupied in the well being the citizens? Do the mothers survive ?” 

The sage intimated, “Bharat, in the form of an ascetic having hair lock and bark cloths, 
awaits your arrival. He is obedient to your commands, and with due honour to your 
wooden footwear, he disposes of the royal responsibilities.” 

The sage continued, “When you moved to forest, seeing you in an ascetic dress 
accompanied by Sita and Lakshaman, I was in sorrow. Today I am glad to see you back 
registering your victory over the demons. You have eliminated all the devil thorns from 
the path of mendicants in Dandak. They now happily devote their time in meditation and 
penance. I also learnt from the eyes of my penance about abduction of Sita, your 
friendship with Sugriv, killing of Vali, crossing of sea by Hanuman, locating Sita, putting 
bridge across sea, and killing of Ravan with his fellow demons." 


In common practice, ashwin shukl dashomi (tenth day of bright fortnight of ashwin, post rainy month) is celebrated as victory day 
of Ram. If on panchami (6-124-1) he was at Bhardwaj asharam, then the dashami has to be understood with a greater rationality. 

In sarg 92, shlok 66, Ravan is seen talking to his minister on chaturdashi, i.e., 14 day of the dark fortnight. Using this as datum, Ram 
talking to Bharadwaj, in sarg 124, on panchmi appears to be consistent. The panchmi is definitely of bright fortnight (but not 
mentioned in valmiki whether dark or bright), because Ravan was the last post who had faught on amavasya. The following day of 
his stay at Bhardwaj ashram, i.e., on 6 th day of bright fortnight Ram arrived in Ayodhya. There could be a possibility that his 
coronation was conducted on 10 th day of the bright fortnight. In some part of India (Puri, Srimandirof lord Jagannath), coronation of 
Lord Ram is celebtrated on vaishakh, krishn navami (9 th day of dark fortnight of vaishakh). 


Page 85 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Conveying the wellbeing of Ayodhya , he mentioned, “My one disciple, Pravriti, regularly 
visits Ayodhya and I know all about there from him.” 

The sage then enquired Ram whether he wished any boon from him, and he also 
requested him to stay at night at his ashram.” 

Ram accepting his invitation to spend the night, requested for one favour, “The zone 
from here to Ayodhya should be made lustrous green. The trees should bear fruits, and 
yield ample honey." 

The sage blessed, “Let it be so.” Soon three yojan of corridor on way to Ayodhaya 
became rich in fruit and honey bearing trees. The accompanying monkeys on way to 
Ayodhya enjoyed the fruits and honey to their fill. 

6-125 Hanuman on errand (46 / 5540) 

Ram sent Hanuman as a messenger to Guh and Bharat, before landing over to 
Bhardwaj, He mentioned, “Convey my wellbeing to Guh, and collecting his wellbeing 
proceed to Bharat. Narrating about my adventure storeys to Bharat, intimate him about 
my arrival. Try to gather his impression about me. In association of Kaikeyi, if you notice 
change in his attitude, convey me soon so that I can find some other place for my stay 
and allow Bharat to enjoy the kingdom of Ayodhaya forever.” 

As desired by Ram, Hanuman arrived at shringaberpur, and met Guh. He informed him, 
“Ram with Sita and Lakshaman has arrived at Bhardwaj ashram. He will soon see you 
here.” 

From there, Hanuman proceeded to Ayodhya. On way he crossed prashuram thirth, and 
rivers of balukani, baruthi, and gomati and huge forest of sal trees. Crossing several 
cities, he arrived in the groves near Nandigram which was as beautiful as Nandanvan of 
Indr, and Chaltrarath of Kuber. One yojan away from Ayodhya, he saw Bhart in an 
ascetic garb, hair locked to a mat. Observing austerity, he had become lean and thin. 
Keeping Ram’s wooden footwear, he used to issue decrees to the citizens. Impressed 
by the Bharat’s style of living, the people of Ayodhya had also maintained optimum 
austerity of abjuring conspicuous consumption. Bharat had ensured total protection to 
all four classes (qicjcfwq ciic^ ?TRTF WIT TTFr 6-125-33 ) of people. The royal ministers 
had also adopted garment of gerua 40 (TTTFI W3) (light red) colour. 

In the guise of a human being, Hanuman appeared before Bharat and spoke to him, 
“Ram who had been in Dandak in the garb of an ascetic, has conveyed his wellbeing to 
you and has enquired about your wellbeing. Killing Ravn, he is coming back happily with 
Sita and Lakshaman. Soon you will be able to see him here.” 

Overjoyed with the pleasant news of arrival of Ram, Bharat had a spell of swoon. Soon 
he recovered, and with tears in his eyes, embraced Hanuman. He spoke to him, “What 
shall I give you in reward? I don’t find any gift as worthy and precious as the news of 
arrival of Ram. However, I reward you with one hundred thousand cows, hundred vassal 
villages, and sixteen beautiful maiden girls in your service.” 

6-126 Hanuman recited legend of Ram (55 / 5595) 


40 


This colour of body wrapper usually forms garb of mendicants and those who lead a life of renunciation. 


Page 86 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Bharat expressed his desire to learn more about Ram. To acquaint him, Hanuman 
initiated reciting the legend, “You are aware about preparation of Ram’s coronation, 
Kaikeyi’s claims, Ram’s forest departure with Sita and Lakshaman, death of Dasarath, 
your denial of accepting the throne, meeting him at Chitrakoot, and coming back with his 
footwear to Ayodhya." 

Hanuman continued the further legend, “After your departure from Chitrakoot, Ram 
Lakshaman and Sita moved to Janasthan. On way they killed Viradh. Thereafter, in the 
evening they stayed at Sharabhang muni’s ashram who departed for higher spiritual 
world. Moving deep in Janasthan, they encountered a demoness Surpanakha who 
wanted to marry Ram, but Lakshaman using his sword cut her nose and ears. She 
instigated Khar against Ram, who made attack over him with fourteen thousand 
demons. Ram killed the entire demons’ army along with Khar, Dushan and Trishira. 
Surpanakha then informed Ravan about Ram, Sita and Lakshaman. Mareech another 
demon, on the behest of Ravan, disguised as a golden deer attracted Sita’s attention. 
When Ram went to grab that golden deer, Lakhaman also followed him later. Seeing 
Sita alone, Ravan stole her away forcefully as mars W afflicts rohini ufs'Jil (6-126-26). 
On way he was opposed by Jatayu, but killing him, Ravan brought Sita to Lanka. When 
Ram came back he didn’t find Sita, and met Jatayu on way. Then they began her 
search. On way he killed Kabandh, and arriving at rishyamuk forged friendship bond with 
Sugriv. He killed Vali, and Sugriv was made king of monkeys. Sugriv sent one hundred 
million monkeys to find out Sita, and I was also one of them. We were not able to locate 
her within specified period of one month. Subsequently we came across, Sampathi, 
brother of Jatayu. He told us about location of Sita in Lanka. I crossed the one hundred 
yojan wide sea, and met Sita in Lanka. I handed over Ram’s ring to her, and brought her 
crest jewel to Ram. Monkeys gathered to move to Lanka. Nal constructed the bridge 
over sea. Landing in Lanka, Neel killed Prahast, Lakshaman killed Indrajeet, Ram killed 
Kumbhakarn and Ravan. Indr, Varun, Kuber, Mahadev, Brahma and Dasarth appeared 
to Ram and blessed him. Ram boarding pushpak came to Kishkindha. From there he 
came to Bhardwaj ashram, and he is staying there. Tomorrow in pushya nakshatr ( 6 - 
126 - 54 ), You will have his auspicious darshan.” 

6-127 Preparations to welcome Ram (64 / 5659) 

Learning all about Ram and his auspicious arrival, Bharat advised Shatrughn, “Perform 
worship in all the temples. Invite Brahmins, queens, citizens, ministers, army, and 
tomorrow morning we have to welcome our hero brother who is arriving back to Ayodhya 
with Sita and Lakshaman.” 

Shatrughn immediately commenced the welcome preparations on a war footing. The 
road from Nandigram to Ayodhya was levelled with of spray of cold water to cut down 
dust. Flowers and paddy corns were strewn over the roads. Mansions were decorated 
with festoons. 

In the morning, Kausalya, Sumitra, and Kaikeyi arrived at Nandigram. All citizens, 
Brahmins gathered to accompany Bharat. Holding footwear of Ram over his head, 
Bharat surrounded by royal bards stood in readiness to accord warm reception. Two 
large umbrella bedecked with white flowers also accompanied him in readiness as a 
mark of royal insignia for Ram. Eight royal ministers Dhrishti, Jayant, Vijay, Sidharth, 
Arthsadhak, Ahok, Mantrpal, and Sumantr mounting on elephants moved out, to join the 


Page 87 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


reception group. Infantry and cavalry carrying colourful flags piloted the welcome crowd. 
The sky rented with welcome sound of conch and trumpets. 

Bharat was so excited that he couldn’t help enquiring again from Hanuman, “How long 
shall we await his arrival? Is it true that he is coming?” 

Encouraging Bharat, Hanuman spoke, “Bhardwaj has blessed the route from Prayag to 
Ayodhya to be full of fruit and honey bearing trees. The monkeys might have been lost in 
the enjoyment of fruits. I hear tumultuous sound of monkeys, they could be crossing 
Gomati. Here it is! See, pushpak has arrived. It looks like another moon, speeding 
towards Ayodhya. Pushpak is now in possession of Ram after killing Ravan. It was 
initially gifted by Brahma to Kuber and from him, Ravan had forcefully grabbed it. It has 
speed of mind. Sita, Ram and Lakshaman with Sugriv and Vibhishan are about to land.” 

Leaving their mounts of horses and elephants, the crowd rushed forth running. In honour 
of Ram, Bharat offered arghya, padya and achamaniyam. Sighting Ram from a distance, 
Bharat offered his salutation to him. Pushpak landed over ground, and Bharat rising on 
board offered his salutation on feet of Ram. Ram picked up Bharat, and putting him on 
his lap, embraced him to his chest. Getting greeted by Lakshaman, Bharat uttering his 
name offered his respect to Sita. Thereafter, Bharat embraced Sugriv, Jambvan, Angad, 
Maind, Dwvid, Neel, Rishabh, Sushen, Nal, Gavaksh, Gandhmadan, Sharabh and 
Panas. Exchanging greetings to each other, Bharat mentioned to Sugriv, “You are our 
fifth brother (6-127-47). 

Thereafter Shatrughn offered his respects to Ram, Sita, Lakshaman and others 
accompanying them in the craft. 

Ram came down and offered his respect on feet of Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi. 
Thereafter, he came to guru Vashishth and offered respect on his foot. The citizens of 
Ayodhya sounded their uproarious reception to Ram. 

Bharat took the footwear to Ram, and prayed him to accept that which he had held for 
fourteen years as a souvenir of his kingdom. He mentioned, “With your accepting of this 
foot wear, you have accepted your kingdom. I am extremely glad to offer back your 
kingdom to you. Kindly inspect the royal treasury, stores and army. They are now ten 
times of what they were earlier.” 

With fond affection, Ram took Bharat in his lap while boarded in pushpak again, and with 
entire army he went to hermitage of Bharat. When pushpak landed, he stood on ground 
and commanded pushpak to go back to Kuber and stay there in his service. As directed 
pushpak left for the abode of Kuber. 

Greeting with reverence his preceptor Vashishath, and his child friend Suyagya (son of 
Vashishth), Ram offered them seat. Taking another seat, he also took his position. 

6-128 Coronation ceremony (125 / 5784) 

When they were seated, Bharat submitted to Ram, “Honouring my mother, You offered 
me this kingdom. Now I give it back to you, as it is. I wish that your coronation should be 
performed at the earliest. You should now be treated like a sovereign.” Ram gladly 
indicated his acceptance. 


Page 88 of 91 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


Royal bathing: 

Shatrughn sent for barbers who stood surrounding Ram and others. Those barbers 
made all preparations for customary royal bath. First Bharat got his bath. Following him 
Lakshaman got his bath. Thereafter, Sugriv and Vibhishan were bathed. Finally, 
arranging his hair in royal style Ram completed his bath. Shatrughn anointed Ram and 
Lakshaman with sandal paste, and dressed them up with flowers, gems and precious 
garments. 

The queens with their own hands bathed Sita, and dressed her in royal outfit. Kausalya 
felt great pleasure in dressing up the wives of the monkeys. 

Royal processsion: 

Sumantr kept ready a splendorous chariot yoked with green horses for Ram’s 
procession in the city. When Ram occupied his seat, Bharat worked as charioteer (6- 
128-28), and Shatrughn stood holding the royal umbrella. Lakshaman on one side, and 
Vibhishan on the other side held the chavar fanning lightly his face. Sita and wives of 
monkeys occupied royal chariots, and joined the procession. Sugriv was mounted over 
an elephant called Shatrunjaya. Monkeys, in the guise of humans, were being carried 
over nine thousand elephants. They were all dressed up with precious jewels. The 
procession was piloted by cavalry and infantry. This was followed by trumpeters 
sounding conches and drums. Following them was the group of singers and dancers 
who produced auspicious music, song and dances. They were followed by people 
carrying sacred rice (3T3FT), golden pot, cows, Brahmins, and maiden girls carrying 
sweets. Following them was the fleet of chariots keeping Ram’s chariot in front. While 
the procession moved on, the citizens came forward to greet Ram with varieties of gifts. 
Offering their gift, they joined the procession building the rear crowd of the procession. 
The flags of the houses were raised in honour of Ram. Finally the procession ended at 
the royal palace. 

Ram entered the personal chamber of his father, and offering his salutation to Kausalya, 
Sumitra and Kaikey, spoke to Bharat, “Sugriv shall stay at my palace.” Shatrughn 
immediately made all arrangements for comfortable stay of Sugriv. 

Coronation (consecration and crowing) 

Bharat requested Sugriv to arrange holy sea water for the coronation of Ram. Taking 
golden pots Hanuman, Jambvan, Rishabh, and Gavay went in four directions. Jambvan 
brought sea water from east sea, Rishabh brought from south sea, Gavay brought from 
west sea, and Flanuman brought from north sea. 

When all the arrangements were made, Vashishth invited Ram and Sita and gave them 
a golden seat. Assisted by sages: Vamdev, Jabali, Kashyap, Katyayan, Suygya, 
Gautam, and Vijay, Vashishth initiated the scriptural procedure of coronation. 

Fragrant water mixed with herbs was sprayed over Ram and Sita as a measure of 
consecration. This was initiated by Vashishth and the other seven sages. Following 
them, Brahmins, maiden girls, ministers, chiefs of army, and elite citizens performed the 
consecration. The celestial beings, and gods staying in sky also offered holy water 
consecration over the royal couple of Ram and Sita. 


Page 89 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


The hereditary resplendent crown was being used from the time of Manu. It was gifted 
by Brahma to him. On getting sanctified by ritualistic procedures, the crown was made 
ready. Vashishth, assisted by the sages, completed the scriptural procedures. It was 
Vashishth who finally crowned Ram. Shatrughn stood holding the white royal umbrella 
over his head. Vibhishan and Sugriv held chavar on his sides. Vayu god, as inspired by 
Indr, offered a garland made of hundred gold lotuses, and a necklace of precious pearls. 
Gandharv presented the sweet songs and music, whereas celestial dancers presented 
captivating dances. The earth became rich with the fragrant breeze, flowers, lush green 
crops, and trees laden with fruits. 

Precious presents 

Ram distributed among Brahmins one hundred thousand horses, same number of milk 
giving cows, hundred bulls, three hundred million gold coins, and lot of precious gems, 
and garments. He gifted one brilliant gold and gem necklace to Sugriv. Angad was 
honoured with two golden armlets matted with precious gems. He put his own pearl 
necklace received from Vayu god to Sita’s neck; besides he gave two divine garments, 
and several more precious jewels to her. 

Sita wanted to gift some valuable gift to Hanuman. She took out the pearl necklace 
received from Ram, and looked towards him. He spoke consenting to her, “Without 
hesitation use your discretion." She passed that precious present to Hanuman. 

Farewell 


Precious gifts were given to all the monkeys. They were glad, and subsequently they 
departed to their respective abode. Monkeys went to Kishkindha, and demons went to 
Lanka. 

Rule of Ram 


While in saddle of glorious kingdom of Ikshvaku dynasty, Ram offered Lakshaman to 
assume the position of regent prince. When Lakshaman didn’t accept the position, Ram 
designated Bharat as the regent prince. Ruling for eleven thousand years, he performed 
several sacrifices called paundrik, ashwamedh, and vajpeya. He earned the reputation 
of conducting hundred aswamedha ygya. 

During his rule, there was no fear from afflictions. Occurrence of crime was never heard. 
People died on coming of old age. No premature death occurred to anybody. Therefore, 
no widow wailing was ever heard. The normal life span of several thousands of years. 
People were peace loving, calm and happy. They were righteous, and never resorted to 
speaking lie. 

Reciting and discussing the glory of Ram was the common topic among the people (6- 
128-102 W TIT Tf # T^TTiWR; § I 7 T f PJT TFT TF^r W# | | ). The 

environment was fully pervaded with Ram. 

Crops never failed. Clouds poured timely rain, and trees were laden with fruits. Cool 
breeze blew all around. People of four classes were greedless, and were totally satisfied 


Page 90 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Yuddh kand 


with their assigned responsibilities. (6-128-104 <ai«y u n§ I 3 <ra j T 

g Trim? I I ) 

Glory to adikavya Ramayan 

This Ramayan is called adikavya 3TlfTTPT and was first composed by Valmiki. Its 
recitation and listening auger desired auspiciousness. Those desirous of children get 
children, those desirous of wealth get wealth. The women shall attain children of the 
same glory and fame as were available to Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi. It is required 
to listen to its recitation with a calm mind abjuring anger and crime. The recitation of 
legend of coronation brings about victory to the kings. 

One should worship and recite this scripture with conviction. In doing so all gods are 
pleased. It secures pleasure of Ram, a manifestation of Vishnu (6-128-119 TFTT ’TTT ^TTS 
*r ft fgcg ■'•MirM § ). Narayan Himself has incarnated as Ram, and Shesh has incarnated 
as Lakshaman (6-128-120). Those who inscribe this Ramayan, are worthy of attaining 
heaven. 

Conclusion: “Its regular listening ensures longevity, fame and affection among brothers, 
and augers auspiciousness.” 


Page 91 of 91 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Uttar kand 


Srimate Ramanuiava namah 

Preface 

Uttar kand is glossary to some of the references made earlier, mostly in yuddh kand. From sarg 1 
though 34 it describes the biographical history of demons and Ravan. Sarg 35 and 36 are 
dedicated to the legend of Hanumanjee. 

Thereafter mostly it covers the aftermath of lord Ram’s coronation: separation from Sita, 
coronation of Shatrughn as king of Madhurapuri (present Mathura near Vrundavan), legends 
depicting significance of ashvamedh ygya, performance of asvamedh ygya at Naimisharnya, 
arrival of Lav kush, recital of valmiki ramayan , coronation of sons of the brothers and Lav kusha, 
and ultimate departure to the divine abode. 

The number of Sarg and shlok in each kand are as below: 


Batkand 

11 

2266 

Ayodhya 

119 

4310 

Aranya 

IB 

2467 

Kishkindha 

67 

2362 

sundar 

68 

2858 

yuddh 

128 

5784 

Uttar 

111 

B1T1 

Total 

645 

23769 


Srimartn Narayan Charnau Sharnam Prapaddye. 


Submission: 


Srikrishna Prapnnachari 
March 8, 2010 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Uttar kand 


Contents 

page 

7-1 Sages with Ram (41 / 41) 1 

7-2 Pulastya and Vishrva (34 / 75) 1 

7-3 Kuber, son of Vishrava (36/111) 2 

7-4 Demons’ race (32 / 143) 3 

7-5 Expanding family of Sukesh (47 / 190) 3 

7-6 Demons attacked gods (70 / 260) 4 

7-7 Demons retreated (55 / 315) 5 

7-8 Demons fled to the netherworld (29 / 344) 6 

7-9 Ravan and his brothers (48 / 392) 6 

7-10 Boons to Ravan (49 / 441) 8 

7-11 Ravan possessed Lanka (52 / 493) 9 

7-12 Birth of Meghanad (32 / 525) 10 

7-13 Ravan killed Kuber’s messenger (41 / 566) 10 

7-14 Ravan defeated yaksh (30 /596) 11 

7-15 Ravan grabbed pushpak (44 / 640) 11 

7-16 Shankar christened him Ravan (49 / 689) 12 

7-17 Curse of Vedvati (44 / 733) 13 

7-18 Ravan defeated Marutt (36 / 769) 14 

7-19 Dying Anaranya cursed Ravan (32 / 801) 15 

7-20 Narad provoked Ravan (33 / 834) 15 

7-21 Ravan attacked Yam (46 / 880) 16 

7-22 Victorious Ravan left Yamlok (51 / 931) 16 

7-23 Ravan defeated sons of Varurt (54 / 985) 17 

7-24 Surpanakha with Khar in Dandakaranya (42 / 1027) 18 

7-25 Successful ygya of Meghanad (52/ 1052) 18 

ii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Uttar kand 


7-26 Nalkubar cursed Ravan (60 / 1112) 19 

7-27 Sumali killed (52/ 1164) 19 

7-28 Continuing fighting of gods and demons (49 / 1213) 20 

7-29 Meghanad arrested Indr (42 / 1255) 21 

7-30 Indr released (54 / 1309) 21 

7-31 Ravan to king Arjun (44 / 1353) 23 

7-32 Arjun arrested Ravan (73 / 1426) 23 

7-33 Pulastya helped release of Ravan (23 / 1449) 24 

7-34 Vali humiliated Ravan (46 / 1495) 24 

7-35 Advent of Hanuman (65 / 1560) 25 

7-36 Hanuman got blessed (63 / 1623) 26 

7-37 Ram in royal court (24 / 1647) 27 

7-38 Farewell to Janak and others (33 / 1680) 27 

7-39 Gifts to Ram (30 / 1710) 28 

7-40 Farewell to monkeys and bears (31 / 1741) 28 

7-41 Coming back of pushpak (22 / 1763) 29 

7-42 Ram in royal grove (36 / 1799) 29 

7-43 Friends reminder to Ram (23 / 1822) 30 

7-44 Ram in union with brothers (21 / 1843) 30 

7-45 Lakshaman to drop Sita beyond ganga (25 / 1868) 30 

7-46 Sita on the ganga bank (33 / 1901) 31 

7-47 Sita across ganga (18 / 1919) 31 

7-48 Sita deserted (26 / 1945) 31 

7-49 Sita met Valmiki (23 / 1968) 32 

7-50 Sumantr disclosed the secret prediction (20 / 1988) 32 

7-51 Durvasa’s disclosure (30 / 2018) 32 

iii 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Uttar kand 


7-52 Lakshaman encouraged Ram (19 / 2037) 33 

7-53 Lakshaman to attend public call (26 / 2163) 33 

7-54 Nrug suffered curse (19 / 2182) 34 

7-55 Nimi and Vashishath cursed each other (21 / 2203) 34 

7-56 Mitr, Varun and Urvashi (29 / 2232) 34 

7-57 Vashishth revived, and lineage of Nimi (21 / 2253) 35 

7-58 Yayati cursed (25 / 2278) 35 

7-59 Puru and Yadu (23 / 2301) 36 

7-59 II 1 A dog in royal court (28 / 2329) 36 

7-59/2 The grievance of the dog (52 / 2481) 37 

7-60 Chyavan met Ram (18 / 2499) 38 

7-61 Atrocities of Lavanasur (24 / 2523) 38 

7-62 Shatrughn to face Lavanasur (21 / 2544) 38 

7-63 Shatrughn’s coronation (31 / 2575) 39 

7-64 Forces dispatched (18 / 2593) 39 

7-65 Shatrughn at Valmiki’s hermitage (39 / 2632) 39 

7-66 Sita gave birth to two sons (17 / 2649) 40 

7-67 King Mandhata (26 / 2675) 41 

7-68 Shatrughn tracked Lavanasur (20 / 2695) 41 

7-69 Lavanasur killed (40 / 2735) 42 

7-70 Madhupuri rehabilitated (17 / 2752) 42 

7-71 Shatrughn on return journey to Ayodhya (24 / 2776) 42 

7-72 Shatrughn met Ram (21 / 2797) 43 

7-73 A wailing Brahmin (19 / 2816) 43 


1 

This sarg 7-59/1 and subsequent sarg 1-59/2 are not common in prevalent several versions of valmiki ramayan. 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Uttar kand 


1-1 A Narada identified the cause (33 / 2849) 43 

7-75 Ram on detection mission (19 / 2868) 44 

7-76 Shambuk killed (51 / 2919) 44 

7-77 A celestial person eating a corpse (21 / 2940) 46 

7-78 Importance of a gift (29 / 2969) 46 

7-79 Reign of the king Dand (20 / 2989) 47 

7-80 Dand raped the daughter of Shukracharya (18 / 3007) 47 

7-81 Dand cursed (22 / 3029) 47 

7-82 Ram back to Ayodhya (20 / 3059) 48 

7-83 Bharat’s view on rajsuya ygya (20/3079) 48 

7-84 Lakshaman pleaded for ashvamedh 3T^FT4 ygya (18 / 3097) 49 

7-85 Vrutr f5T killed (22 / 3119) 49 

7-86 Asvamedh liberated Indr (21 / 3140) 50 

7-87 lla 171 : male and female (29 / 3169) 50 

7-88 llaasHT met Budh (24/3193) 51 

7-89 llaa gave birth to Pururava (25 / 3218) 51 

7-90 Asvamedh ygya helped lla (24 / 3242) 52 

7-91 Preparations for asvamedh (29 / 3271) 52 

7-92 Valuable gifts in asvamedh (19 / 3290) 53 

7-93 Valmiki arrived in ygya (19/ 3309) 53 

7-94 Ramayan presented by Lav - Kush (32 / 3341) 53 

7-95 Sita to certify by oath (17 / 3358) 54 

7-96 Valmiki supported Sita (24 / 3382) 54 

7-97 Sita took oath and entered netherworld (26 / 3408) 55 

7-98 Brahma consoled Ram (28 / 3436) 55 


v 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Contents : Uttar kand 


7-99 Ram’s routine (20/ 3456) 56 

7-100 Bharat moved to gandharv desh (25 /3481) 56 

7-101 Bharat secured victory (18/ 3499) 57 

7-102 Crowning of Angad and Chadraketu (17 / 3516) 57 

7-103 Arrival of kal 2 (17 / 3533) 57 

7-104 Ram got the message (19 / 3552) 58 

7-105 Episode of Durvasa (18 / 3570) 58 

7-106 Ram discarded Lakshaman (18 / 3588) 59 

7-107 Lav and Kush crowned (21 / 3609) 59 

7-108 Departing directions (38 / 3647) 59 

7-109 Ram moved out of Ayodhya (22 / 3669) 60 

7-110 Divine integration (28 / 3697) 61 

7-111 Glory to the primordial epic (25 / 3722) 61 


2 Refer the next sarg 104, shlok-2 which defines what is kal. It is the time keeper of every being. 


VI 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Srimate Ramanujaya namah 

Uttar kand 
(111 sarg) 


7-1 Sages with Ram (41 / 41) 

As promised by Ram, he achieved the target of elimination of demons and establishment 
of righteousness. For such a great welfare of common mass, the sages thought to 
express their obligation by glorifying him. With this aim they arrived in Ayodhya. Those 
who arrived from the east were Kaushik, Yavkrit, Gargya, Galav, and Kanv (son of 
Medhatithi). Accompanying Agastya, and coming from the south were Swastyatreya, 
Namuchi, Pramuchi, Atri, Sumukh, and Vimukh. The sages who stay in the west were 
Nrushang, Kavash, Dhaumya, and Kausheya; they arrived with their disciples. Seven 
sages known as saptrishi (miff), are Vashishth, Kashyap, Atri, Viswamitr, Gautam, 
Jamdagni, and Bhardwaj, and they eternally stay in the north. Some of them were 
already present in Ayodhya, and the rest also arrived to join the group of the sages 
coming to Ayodhya. 

Together they gathered on the royal gate, and Agastya asked the guard to intimate Ram 
of their arrival. On the command of Ram, when they were respectfully ushered inside the 
palace, Ram greeted them with folded palms. They were given grand golden seats 
topped with kusha under the deer skin. When Ram completed their worship with arghya, 
padya, and achaman, sages praised him for his excellent performance of killing the 
demons, “It is a great fortune that Ravan, Kumbhakarn, Indrajeet, Prahast, Atikaya, 
Kumbh, Nikumbh and host of other devils have been eliminated. Lakshaman’s effort in 
killing Indrajeet is noteworthy, and he needs a special felicitation for this." 

Ram was surprised at the special reference of Indrajeet. He enquired from the sages, 
“What is special about Indrajeet? How did he earn his potential?” 

7-2 Pulastya and Vishrva (34 / 75) 

Introducing Indrajeet, Agastya spoke to Ram, “Before describing the potential he earned, 
it would be proper to take a look at the heritage he comes from. Back in satyug, sage 
Pulastya was a worthy son of Brahma. Because of his super saintly qualities, he was 
highly respected by gods. Once he went to the hermitage of Trunbindu, situated near 
meru mount, and continued to stay there. 

The area around there was rich in natural resources. Delicious seasonal fruits, and clean 
water were available in abundance. The natural scene being charming, celestial dancers 
accompanied by daughters of sages used to throng the place for pleasure. Pulastya felt 
disturbance in his spiritual pursuit. One day, he asked the gathering of the damsels to 
quit, and never come back to that place, otherwise those who will fall in his visual sight 
would go pregnant. Afraid of his curse, celestial danceres didn’t turn up again. The 
daughter of Trunbindu was unaware of this incident, and she alone came as usual 


Page 1 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


expecting the arrival of her group mates. When none turned up, she heard the rhythmic 
recitation of ved by Pulastya, and inadvertently drew close to his practice place. When 
the sage raised his eyebrow and had a view of her, her body was afflicted by his curse of 
pregnancy. Her complexion turned pale, and afraid of the incident she rushed to her 
father Trunbindu. He used his potential of penance and knew what had happened. 
Holding the hand of his daughter, he came to Pulastaya and offered her as his attendant 
and consort. 

Accepting her, Pulastya spent some time together, and one day, impressed by her 
conduct, the sage mentioned, “ I first saw you while reciting ved (fc), and you heard 
that, therefore you will be blessed with a son who will later be renowned for his profound 
learning in ved, and shall be called vishrava (frmr meaning one who heard ved)." 
Subsequently the child born to her was named Vishrava and took up the path set by his 
worthy father Pulastya. 

7-3 Kuber, son of Vishrava [36 1 111) 

By his conduct, practice and nature, Vishrava turned out to be a true follower of his 
father Pulastya. Soon he earned the reputation for his profound learning of ved and 
hallmark of righteous conduct. Impressed by his qualities, sage Bhardwaj offered his 
daughter to him. In course of time, he was blessed with a son, who was named 
Vaishravan (Ymw <jt ftp). 

Vaishravan had inherent qualities of his father and toeing the worthy path of penance for 
thousands of years, he pleased Brahma. Initially for one thousand years he stayed on 
water, and in the following one thousand years he stayed only on air. In later years he 
stopped taking breathing also. Pleased by his severe penance, gods and Brahma 
arrived to bless him. When Brahma asked about his wishes, he mentioned, “I want to be 
a protector of the universe.” Pleased by his noble aim, he blessed him to be so. Brahma 
mentioned, “Subsequent to first three Yama, Indr and Varun, I was contemplating the 
creation of the other one, and that fourth position is offered to you. You will look after the 
treasure of the celestials, and I also handover one pushpak viaman to facilitate your 
movement to the desired places at desired speed.” Gods consented to Brahma’s offer 
to Vaishravan and dispersed. 

Vaishravan narrated the story of his securing of blessings to his father, Vishrava, and 
enquired from him, “Brahma didn’t assign any place for my stay. Where shall I have my 
abode?” Vishrava assigning him a suitable place to stay mentioned, “On the sea shore 
there is a mountain called trikoot. Vishwakarma had established a beautiful city using 
gold and precious gems. This city is called Lanka and has deep ditches around its 
golden ramparts. Previously it was inhabited by demons, but afraid of Vishnu, they 
deserted the city. You may occupy the city and make it your capital. Happily Vaishravan 
entered the city, and with his peaceful stay, other demons gradually joined him and 
became prosperous. From time to time, Vaisharavan (also called Kuber) used to pay 
visit to his parents. 


Page 2 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-4 Demons’ race (32 / 143) 

Ram was surprised to learn that some more demons other than Ravan used to exist 
beyond Lanka; he requested Agastya to give detail account on this aspect. Agastya 
narrated one incident of Braham, “Initially Brahma, who was born from the lotus flower, 
created several creatures to protect the water of sea. Some of them proclaimed, “We will 
provide protection and some announced to worship {mrt) the sea. Those 

dedicated to protection {rsr) became demon {ustf), and those taking over worship 
became yaksh (vsr). This is how two groups emerged.” 

Deliberating the lineage of demons, Agastya mentioned, “Heti and Praheti were two 
brothers. The former, Heti was mighty and endowed with a huge body. The latter, 
Praheti being cool minded resorted to long term penance. Heti looking for a bride 
married the sister of Kal called Bhaya. Subsequently he was blessed with a mighty son 
called Vidyutkesh. Gradully Vidyutkesh grew with a strong body like his father. He was 
married to daughter of Sandhya, called Salakatankata. Later, Salakatankata gave birth 
to a male child on the top of Manadarachal. Deserting the child there, she resumed the 
lustrous life with her husband. Shiv and Parvati, while passing over Mandarachal, heard 
the cry of the nascent child. Realising the immense compassion of Parvati over the child, 
Shiv blessed him to instantly attain the youthfulness of the age of his mother. He also 
provided him immortality, and an aircraft for his movement which was as large as a 
town. This child was later called Sukesh. Subsequently Parvati blessed the entire race of 
demons, to procreate fast with substantially reduced period of pregnancy, and after birth, 
the child to grow instantly to the age of mother.” 

7-5 Expanding family of Sukesh (47 / 190) 

A gandharv called Gramani, being impressed by the splendour of Sukesh, married his 
daughter Devavati with him. They produced fire like radiant three sons Malyavan, 
Sumali, and Mali. They grew knowledgeable like three ved mantr of rig, yaju, and sam. 
At the same time, they became dreadful like three causes of disease: gas, bile, and 
phlegm. In terms of their dreadfulness they grew fast like an unattended disease. When 
they came to know that their father had attained the splendour by penance, they also 
commenced tough penance. Impressed by the severity of penance, Brahma arrived 
surrounded by gods. They demanded longevity, and victory over opponents. Brahma 
granted their wish and left. 

Proud of the Brahma’s blessings, they commenced torturing sages, and gods and 
continued disrupting the penance of sages. Once they appeared to Vishwakarma, and 
asked him to provide them cities like amaravati of Indr. Vishwakarma revealed to them 
the existing creation of Lanka over peak of trikoot . Soon Lanka became their 
headquarter. 

Subsequently they got married to three daughters of Narmada, a female gandharv in the 
auspicious period of uttaraphalguni nakshatr ). In course of time, Malyavan’s 


Page 3 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


wife Sundari gave birth to seven sons:Vajrmushti, Virupash, Durmukh, Suptaghn, 
Ygyakop, Matt and Unmatt, and one daughter, Anala. 

Sumali’s wife Ketumati had eleven sons and four daughters. The sons were: Prahast, 
Akampan, Vikat, Kalikamukh, Dhumarksh, Dand, Suparshv, Sanhadi, Praghas, and 
Bhaskarn; the daughters were Raka, Pushpotakata, Kaikasi, and Kumbhinasi. 

Mali had wife named Vasuda, and they produced Amal, Anil, Har and Sampathi who 
were ministers to Vibhishan. 

With increased strength of the family, demons commenced a large scale torturing of 
sages and gods. They didn’t allow the performance of oblations and penance. 

7-6 Demons attacked gods (70 / 260) 

Aggrieved by the continuous torture of demons, sages and gods collectively appealed to 
Shiv. Hearing their grievances, he advised them, “Sukesh is my blessed devotee, I can’t 
harm his family. I advise you to pray Narayan who holds disc, conch and srivats (wrm) 
icon over his chest.” 

The sages approached Narayan and offered their prayer as well as registered their 
grievances against the rising atrocities of demons. Narayan assured them to help, and 
thereafter, they left chanting his glory 1 . 

Malyavan heard about the meeting of sages and gods to Shiv and, subsequently to 
Narayan. He narrated the entire incidents to his brothers Sumali and Mali. Malyavan 
narrated, “We are aware of the potential of Naryan. He had handled skilfully the end of 
Hirnyakashipu, Namuchi, Sanhalad, Kalnemi, Radhey, Yamalarjun, Shumbh, Nishumbh 
and others. It would be difficult for us to win him, if he has resolved to bring about our 
end." 

Sumali and Mali were surprised to hear the words of Malyvan who was apparently afraid 
of Narayan. Both the brothers assured Malayvan about their potential, “We have 
performed penance, sacrifices and study of ved. We are not afraid of any power, let it be 
Indr, Rudr, Naryan, and Yam. We must pre-empt the efforts of gods and make an attack 
before they take any action. 

The demons army riding chariots, horses, elephants, camels, boar, deer, snakes etc 
moved out to attack over gods. While they were moving towards the abode of gods they 
noticed bad omens: mountains shook, clouds rained blood and bones, jackals wailed, 
vultures spitting flashes hovered over demons, parrots and other sweet birds deserted 


1 _______ 

Shlok 7-6-13, 7-6-22, 7-6-30 are worth referring. Sometimes the confusion persists about the different entity of Narayan [ r T! v ! : Q 1J ! ) 

than that of Vishnu ( ). This is clarified by these shlok of Valmiki that they are one. $TW *70 ZJZ T 7-6-13; 

s xtfftwpr mR 7-6-22; ^5# vrflis mwm miRrs / gR-mms zftomm w vww 

7-6-30 


Page 4 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Lanka, crows croaked, cats growled. Despite occurrences of all the bad signs, the 
demons were not deterred. 

The messenger of gods informed Narayan about the impending attack of demons. 
Besides his eternal disc, conch, and mace, he equipped himself with sword perched to 
his waist, bow and quivers hanging from his shoulders. Riding his mount garud, he 
stormed over the demons’ army. With the lashes of flying wing of garud, the chariots, 
elephants and others were severely destabilised. Observing his arrival, the demons 
collectively charged their attack over him. 

7-7 Demons retreated (55 / 315) 

Demons attack was like rains over the Narayan mountain. Their arrows and weapons 
were lost in him as if the beings have entered his body during the dissolution of the 
universe. They had surrounded him so closely that closed air circulation created a 
feeling of the still ( kumbhak fw) stage of pranayam (5 nwm) for him. Their concerted 
attack gave an impression as if fish had charged attack over the ocean 2 (7-7-7). 

Answering their charges, Narayan shot stream of shafts from his sharang bow causing a 
large scale carnage. Following that he blew the panchjanya conch producing so 
terrifying sound that demons had a retreat towards Lanka. They were scared as 
elephants by a lion, tigers by an elephant, leopards by a tiger, dogs by a leopard, cats by 
a dog, snakes by a cat, and rats by a snake. 

Seeing the pitiable condition of demons army, Sumali commenced shooting of shafts 
over Naryan, and encouraged by his performance, the demons stopped the retreat. 
Narayn appeared behind the cover of showering shafts, as if hidden sun moved behind a 
pall of fog. To counter his assault, Narayan killed his charioteer, and in absence of the 
driving whip, the horses became wild. Sumali was being dragged by the horses 
aimlessly from one place to another. 

In the meanwhile, Mali rushed in support of Sumali, and picked up the combat by 
showering of arrows over Narayan. The demon’s arrows were lost over him, as if birds 
entered the hole 3 of the kronch mountain. To contain his charge, Narayan cut down his 
crown, flag, bow and killed the horses. Mali jumped down over ground holding mace in 
his hand. He made a heavy punch over the head of garud, which almost turned him 
around. This caused a situation in which Narayan had his back towards the enemy. The 
demon made a roaring laugh humiliating him over the battle ground. Narayan charged 
his infallible disc which cut down the Mali’s head off his body. 

When Mali was dead, his other two brothers, Sumali and Malyavan retreated fast 
towards Lanka. They were followed by the demons army, and Narayan's continued 


Valmiki is fond of quoting appropriate comparisons. 

3 Very often, Valmiki uses this comparison which is related to the legend of karitikeya. 


Page 5 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


chasing them causing huge loss of lives. Narayan was seen like lord Nrusinha 4 ( 7 - 7-52 
&J&JMFI ) crushing the scores of elephants. In the meanwhile garud had also 
regained his normalcy, and his wings resumed causing flutter among the retreating army 
of demons. 

7-8 Demons fled to the netherworld (29 / 344) 

Malyavan condemned Narayan for maintaining the attack over retreating army, “O, 
Possessor of disc and conch! You don’t seem to be aware of the rule of conduct in a 
battle. Scriptures condemn to attack over retreating army from behind. Let me stand and 
face you now.” 

Narayan mentioned, “I am committed to gods for elimination of those who disturb the 
practices of ygya and fire oblations. To meet my objective I have to ignore the scriptural 
provisions you have mentioned.” 

Consequently, Narayan and Malyavan were engaged in a fierce battle. The demon 
charged a deadly shakti (sharp pestle) over Narayan and that entered his chest. He took 
out the shakti from his chest, and hurled it back over the demon. Pounding shakti , broke 
the shield over the chest of the demon, and he had a spell of swoon. Recovering soon, 
the demon charged another iron club over his chest, and in quick succession pounded 
his chest with his fist. Continuing his aggression, the demon punched heavily over 
garud. Enraged garud, swung his wing so heavily that the demon was thrown away like 
a dry leaf by a storm. Afraid of this, Sumali and Malyavan retreated with their army to 
Lanka. 

Subsequently, such incidents were repeated several times and the demons were forced 
to take retreat. Later, demons deserted Lanka and sought shelter in the netherworld. In 
the meanwhile Kuber took possession of Lanka. 

Narrating the legend so far, Agastya mentioned, “Those demons were much mightier 
than Ravan, and many of them were killed, and the rest were forced out of Lanka by the 
possessor of conch and disc, Vishnu. Ram! You being the same four handed 5 Narayan, 
now incarnated in this form had eliminated Ravan.” 

7-9 Ravan and his brothers (48 / 392) 

Sumali while staying in the netherworld was worried about the marriage of his daughter, 
Kaikasi ( %mr ). He thought, “The daughter should be married to a suitable person, 
possessed with matching qualities of the girl. The marriage is a gift of daughter to some 


4 Valmiki has frequently quoted Trivikram ( ), and Upendra ( do^ ). The comparison with Nrusimha tW ) 

incarnation has appeared for the first time. 

5 7-8-26 wwhwi rrwFrs / ymH wgt&nT s // 


Page 6 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


able groom, and this must be performed at the earliest. Father has the responsibility of 
selecting a groom.” Reflecting thus, when he wandered over earth, he saw Kuber 
moving towards his parents. He was impressed by his personality and coming back to 
his daughter he mentioned, “Kuber, has a charming personality and splendid status. He 
is son of Vishrava. If you agree, I would advise you to impress Vishrava, and beget 
children from him as influential as Kuber.” 

Having this in mind, Kaikasi, arrived at Vishrava’s place in the evening when he was 
busy in performing the ritual of oblation in fire. She saw, “Oblation square had flames of 
three 6 types of fire. Vishrava looked like the fourth brilliant flame.” Taking an appropriate 
place, she stood on a side. When Vishrva had a look at her, he enquired, “Who are you, 
and why did you come to me?” She replied with folded hands, “I am here in your service 
under the command of my father. My name is Kaikasi. The rest I would request you to 
know by power of your penance.” The sage drew into meditation, and knew all about 
her. He spoke to her, “You have come to me with an intention to be blessed with a son. 
You have expressed your desire in the evening time, therefore you will get sons mighty 
but cruel like demons.” Afraid of his prediction, she fell on his feet and prayed for 
righteous and a religious son. He assured that the youngest son would be a religious 
person matching with the status of the heritage. 

Subsequently she gave birth to a child with ten heads, twenty hands, wide chin, shining 
hair and jet black complexion. At the time of his birth bad omens 7 were observed. 
Looking at his ten heads, Vishrava named him Dashagriv (??/w ). Later, Dashagriv’s 
brother Kumbhakarn was born. Before the birth of the youngest brother Vibhishan, sister 
Surpanakha was born. When Vibhishan was born, shower of flowers took place, and at 
the same time sweet sounds of celestial drums were heard. 

Dashagiv and Kumbhakarn were very cruel, and for sages they proved rogues, 
obstructing their performances. Kumbhakarn was never able to satiate his hunger, and 
he used to devour the sages alive. Vibhishan was different from them, and his life style 
was that of a righteous person. 

Once Kuber, arrived at Vishrava’s place in pushpak. Kaikasi, drawing the attention of 
Dashagriv spoke to him, “How splendorous and impressive is Kuber! You should also 
earn similar status and splendour.” 

Ravan assured her to fulfil her desire, and with this aim in mind, he along with his 
brothers moved to Cokarn for penance. 


6 mwm 3w^m 

7 Fire flashes from jackals mouth, vultures giving round, clouds raining blood with thunder, quaking earth, stormy wind, and fall of 
comets. 


Page 7 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-10 Boons to Ravan (49 / 441) 

All the three brothers undertook severe penance for ten thousand years. With his firm 
resolve, Kumbhakarn maintained a righteous routine. He used to spend his summer 
days amidst burning fire. During rains, he weathered heavy shower under open sky. 
During winter, he stayed immersed in cold water. 

Vibhishan was engaged in austere routine, and stood over one leg for five thousand 
years. Celestial dancers showered flowers over him. His next five thousand years were 
spent in praying sun keeping his folded hands raised with his face looking upward. 

Ravan had a peculiar style of penance. He maintained fast for ten thousand years. At 
the end of every one thousand year, he offered his one head in fire. At the end of ten 
thousand years, when he was about to offer his tenth head to fire god, Brahma appeared 
and dissuaded him in doing so. 

Brahma enquired, “What wishes you have. Tell me I would fulfil them.” Ravan bowing 
respectfully to Brahma, sought the life of immortality. He spoke, “There is no enemy like 
death, and therefore make me ever alive." Brahma explained to him, “This type of boon 
keeping you ever alive is not feasible.” Ravan with folded hands, then submitted, “Make 
me immortal against garud, sankes, yaksh, demons, and gods. I am not bothered about 
the other creatures. As regards humans they are insignificant like grass to me.” Brahma 
granted him what he wished, and at the same time mentioned, “You will regain the 
original ten heads. You will also possess power of assuming any guise you wish to 
have.” 

Coming to Vibhishan Brahma enquired his wishes. Vibhishan offering prayer and 
respectful salutation, mentioned, “Your presence and glimpse are boons for me. Allow 
me to stabilise my mind in righteous performances. Even during perilous hours my mind 
should not waver from moral conducts. I should be endowed with the knowledge of 
brahmashtr. I understand, nothing is impossible for those who adhere to righteousness.” 
Brahma was glad to hear his submission, ” Even though born in the demon’s family, you 
are endowed with superb qualities of a righteous person. I grant your wishes, and at the 
same time make you immortal.” 

When Brahma moved to Kumbhakarn, gods pleaded, “No special power should be 
conferred upon him. He is monstrous and is capable of devouring alive several beings. 
The other day, he ate alive seven celestial dancers, ten attendants of Indr, and host of 
sages and humans.” Brahma invoked the presence of godess Sarswati over his tongue 
and Kumbhakarn sought, “Allow me sound slumber for years.” Brhama granting him to 
be so, left the place with gods. 

Later, when the influence of Sarswati was over, Kumbhakarn repented, “I wonder, how 
did I seek such insignificant boon from Brahma. It must be the tricks of gods”. He felt 
sorry about his solicitation to Brahma. However, all the three brothers, later retired in 
forest for relaxation. 


Page 8 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-11 Ravan possessed Lanka (52 / 493) 

The news of boons to Ravan reached the netherworld. Sumali was proud of his 
grandchildren and with four ministers Mareech, Prahast, Virupaksh and Mahodar he 
came to felicitate them. While with Dashagriv he advised him, “Lanka was earlier in our 
possession. Due to fear of frequent persecution of Vishnu, we took refuge in 
netherworld. Subsequently Kuber took the possession of the city, and now it has 
become his property. You have been endowed mighty potential and immunity against 
gods, it is proper time to grab the city for the demons. You are now our master and our 
wellbeing is in your hands.” 

Dashagriv didn’t approve the advice offered by Sumali, “Kuber is my elder brother and 
he is respectable to me. You shouldn’t talk so about him.” Sumali withdrew quietly. 
When some substantial time rolled out, Prahast once tried to convince Dashagriv 
politely, “Diti and Aditi, two wives of Kashyap produced gods and demons respectively. 
Earlier the earth was in possession of demons. Later, Vishnu interfered and gods have 
become the master of earth. We have been dispossessed from earth. Such things of 
using force have been initiated by gods. Therefore, the advice of Sumali to you should 
be considered once again.” 

Dashagriv was pleased with the advice of Prahast and he sent him as messenger to 
Kuber. As desired by Dashagriv, Prahast went to Kuber and conveyed him the message 
of Dashagriv, “This city of Lanka was earlier possessed by Sumali and other demons. 
We would appreciate if you vacate Lanka for demons.” Kuber advised Prahast, “I have 
been here when it was deserted. My father sent me here to stay. Subsequently, on my 
initiative people settled here peacefully. You may convey to Dashagriv that all my 
possession is his possession also. He is welcome to avail them freely.” 

Saying thus to Prahast, Kuber went to father Vishrava, and narrated the incident. 
Vishrava told him, “Dashagriv had earlier mentioned this to me also. Then I rejected his 
claim, and rebuked him angrily, saying that such claims would lead to his downfall. Now I 
think, because of earning boon he has become conceited. My curse would have also 
become effective, and he is possessed by low and selfish desire. Better vacate Lanka 
and settle over Kailas. Here at Kailas, several other gods and celestial beings stay 
happily. The natural resources of river Mandakini adds to its grandeur.” 

As desired by his father, Kuber vacated the city with his family, belongings and people. 
Subsequently, Prahast informed Dashgriv about the availability of Lanka for Kuber had 
vacated the city for good. Dashgriv entered the city with other demons, and he was 
crowned their king. Soon Lanka came in the possession of demons. 

Kuber, shifting to Kailas settled a new city called Alakapuri, as grand as Amaravati of 
Indr. 


Page 9 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-12 Birth of Meghanad (32 / 525) 

In course of time, Ravan married his sister Surpanakha to Vidyujihva, son of Kalaka. 
Later, once he was on a hunting mission in forest and there he met Maya (w) with a girl. 
He enquired their identity. Maya replied, “Earlier Sachi, daughter of the demon Pulom, 
was gifted to Indr. In similar way, gods gifted me Hema, a renowned celestial dancer. 
She stayed with me for long, in a city, I specially built of gold for her comfort. She 
brought forth one daughter, called Mandodari, and two sons Mayavi and Dundubhi. This 
girl with me is my daughter, and I am looking for a match for her alliance.” 

Completing his details, when Maya enquired his details, Dashagriv mentioned, “ I am 
Dashagriv son of Vishrva. My father is son of Pulastya, and he is direct third generation 
from Brahma.” 

Maya knew about curse of Vishrava about his cruelty, but impressed by his rich heritage, 
he proposed the marriage of Mandodari to him. Dashagriv agreed to his proposal, and in 
presence of fire god the marriage was solemnised. Dashgriv came back with his wife to 
Lanka. Subsequently he arranged marriage of Kumbhakarn to Vajrajwala, 
granddaughter of demon king Bali. Vibhishan was married to Sarama, daughter of a 
saintly gandharv Shailush. She was born on the bank of Mansarovar ( a great lake). Due 
to onset of rainy season, the lake water overflowed, and her mother asked the lake not 
to overtop the bank. Her wish was in Sanskrit, m m z&m O, lake! Don’t overflow. This 
caused her name wrf . 

All the brothers lead a happy conjugal life in Lanka. Subsequently, Mandodari gave 
birth to a male child who made a thunderous sound of cloud when he was born. Pleased 
by his thunder, Ravan called him Meghanad. 

7-13 Ravan killed Kuber’s messenger (41 / 566) 

Kumbhakarn once felt the prevalence of Brahma’s words. He had an intense 
feeling to sleep, and he asked Ravan to arrange for his safe sleeping place. On 
command of Ravan, one yojan wide and two yojan long, grand fort was built. All 
sorts of luxurious provisions including fixing of precious gems were made. 
Kumbhakarn entered the slumber palace and had a sound sleep for thousands of 
years. In the meanwhile, Ravan caused atrocities over sages and gods, and 
earned their displeasure. 

Kuber had undertaken a special penance of raudr vrat on the Himalayas. One 
morning he could feel the presence of Shiv and Parvati in the vicinity. Out of 
curiosity, he took a partial glance from the corner of his left eye. He could see a 
rare form of goddess Parvati and that burnt his left eye. His right eye was also 
filled with dust and it turned pale. Thereafter he concentrated over his penance 


8 


Her name had appeared consoling Sita in 6-33 (yuddh kand, sarg 33) when Ravan tried to scare Sita showing fake head of Ram. 


Page 10 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


and completed it in eight hundred years. Pleased over his performance, Shiv 
appeared and spoke to him in sweet words, “Only two persons, you and me have 
performed this penance. I am highly pleased by your steadfastness. Let us now 
become friends. Earlier, because of Parvati, you had lost your one eye and the 
other had become pale, therefore, you will be called by a new name Ekashipingla 
also.” 

Saying thus Shiv left, and Kuber also came to his abode in Alakapuri. He learnt 
about the misdeeds of Ravan of obstructing the penance, and sacrifices of sages 
and gods. In this regard, he sent a messenger to Ravan, advising him to mend 
his ways and adopt righteous conduct. The messenger arriving at Lanka, first 
met Vibhishan and conveyed his intention of visit. Vibhishan took him to Ravan 
in his royal court. The messenger hailed the victory of the demon king, and stood 
on a side. Subsequently he submitted the message of Kuber, “O, Demon king, 
Dashagriv! I was out for long time on a penance. Coming back I learnt about your 
increasing atrocities over sages and gods. They might plan to teach you a 
lesson. Therefore it is high time you should improve your image worthy of our 
respected heritage.” 

Ravan became angry to hear his message, and pulling his sword killed the 
messenger. The demons feasted upon the messenger’s body. After that, Ravan 
made a preparation to attack over Kuber’s abode. Invoking the auspiciousness, 
through chanting of swastivachan he rode the chariot. 

7-14 Ravan defeated yaksh (30 /596) 

Ravan arrived in Alakapuri, accompanied by six warriors Mahodar, Prahast, 
Marich, Shuk, Saran, and Dhumraksh. His arrival was intimated to Kuber that 
Ravan had arrived with an intention to attack over the Alakapuri. Kuber 
commanded yaksh army to face him boldly. Fierce fighting took place and yaksh 
suffered massive casualty. Kuber sent more reinforcement lead by 
Sanyodhkantak. Marich was grievously injured by Sanyodhkantak, and was 
thrown down the mountain. Later when he recovered, the yaksh chief couldn’t 
face him. Ravan also entered into the main gate of the city despite the warning of 
Suryabhanu, the guard on duty. Enraged by his trespassing, the guard pounded 
a pole over him, and Ravan bled like a mountain streaming with moorum mixed 
water. His boon of Brahma worked and he was safe against all attacks. Killing 
the guard Raven entered deep inside the city. 

7-15 Ravan grabbed pushpak (44 / 640) 

Having come to know the casualty of yaksh , Kuber sent Manibhadr with four thousand 
army. His army was destroyed by Prahast, Mahodar and Marich. Subsequently, 


Page 11 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Manibhadr punched a pestle over the chest of Dhumraksh, but he was safe. In the 
immediate succession, Manibhadr, charged his mace over the demon’s head, and he fell 
over ground soaked in blood. Seeing Dhumraksh over ground, Ravan stormed over 
Manibhadr. Manibhadr charged three pestles over him, but Ravan was safe. Continuing 
his attack, Ravan punched over his head, that caused his crown shifting sideways. 
Thereafter, Manibhadr quit the ground carrying his oblique crown which caused him to 
be called Parshvamauli also. 

In the meawhile, Kuber arrived there accompanied by his two ministers Shukr, and 
Prausthpad. Two gods of wealth, Shankh and Padm were also with him. Aggrieved by 
the impudence of Ravan he rebuked him, “Today you don’t listen to my words, but soon 
your sins will reap the consequences. Misdeeds always invite trouble where as the act 
adhering moral conduct yield beneficial results.” Warning him in several ways, Kuber 
himself took the command of fight. He used his mace to injure the demon warriors and 
they couldn’t face him any longer. Subsequently he charged his mace over Ravan, but 
nothing happened to him. Soon both were engaged in a fierce fighting. 

The agni astr of Kuber was countered by Varun astr of Ravan. Thereafter resorting to 
sorcery, Ravan appeared in several deceptive forms of tiger, boar, cloud, tree, yaksh, 
sea, and monster. Taking advantage of his disguise, he pounded his mace over the 
head of Kuber. He fell unconscious over ground, and he was picked by other gods and 
taken to the nandan van where he recovered some time later. 

In the meanwhile Ravan grabbed his pushpak which was a celestial aerial chariot 
capable of flying as per wish of the person on board. It was decorated with precious 
gems and had provision of automatic temperature control to suit the comfort of a given 
season. Celestial trees provided fruits in all seasons planted inside the chariot. It has 
expanding accommodation capacity as per strength of the number of passengers on 
board. Proud of his victory Ravan riding pushpak arrived in Lanka. 

7-16 Shankar christened him Ravan (49 / 689) 

Once, Ravan happened to pass over a mountain but the pushpak couldn’t cross beyond 
a given line. He was surprised and his ministers wondered whether pushpak wanted 
Kuber’s presence for its effective operation. In the meanwhile, Nandishwar, attendant of 
Shankar appeared and warned him, “Leave this place. None of the gods, yaksh , and 
celestial beings could cross beyond this line. The zone ahead is reserved for pastime of 
Shankar." 

Enraged Ravan burst out, “Who is this Shankar and what is his pastime ?” Saying that 
he arrived at the foot of the mountain. He found Nandi standing there, like a second 
Shankar, with trident in his hand, but his face took after a monkey. Ravan ridiculed over 
his face, and laughed derisively. That caused Nandi to curse him, “Your race including 
you will end due to attack of mighty monkeys of my stature. They will have forms of 
mountains and using their dreadful nails and teeth, they will bring about the end of 
demons. Although I am capable of eliminating you but I spare your life now.” 


Page 12 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Ravan ignored the words of Nandi and coming to the foot of the mountain he 
announced, “Due to this mountain pushpak didn’t move forward. Let me uproot this 
now.” Saying that when he used his arms to lift the mountain, it moved from its position. 
This scared the attendants of Shankar , and Parvati also felt uncomfortable. Shankar 
immediately pressed down the mountain with toe of his foot. Ravan’s arms were 
entrapped below the mountain and he produced a terrific sound. The beings of the earth 
under panic wept with tears in their eyes. 

Finding no way out, his ministers advised Ravan to pray Shankar. Ravan commenced 
his prayer and reciting glory to Shankar. He was kept in that situation for one thousand 
years, but he continued his prayer without break. Pleased by his valour, Shankar 
released his trap, and asked for boon. Ravan demanded, “Brahma had given me long 
life and immunity against gods and celestial beings. Since his boon, substantial years 
have passed and that has reduced my age by that amount of time. I pray you to renew 
the elapsed life, and I also seek one divine weapon from you." 

Hearing his demand Shankar spoke to him, “Your elapsed years are now recovered". 
Gifting him a brilliant sword called Chandrahas, he again spoke to him, “You have also 
to be careful in giving due honour to this sword. If felt neglected, it will come back to me. 
From today you will be known by a new name Ravan, because your terrific sound has 
caused other beings to weep in panic.” 

Thereafter, strengthened by Shankar’s blessings, his cruelty assumed a larger 
proportion. He roamed around the three worlds, and established his victory grounding 
the opponents down to dust. 

7-17 Curse of Vedvati (44 / 733) 

Ravan was wandering once over the Himalayas. He saw a beautiful girl clad in an 
ascetic robe of deer skin. She was busy in meditation. Under impulse of lust, he went 
near the girl and asked her identity. She narrated her story, “My father Kushidhwaj, son 
of Bruhaspati, was greatly involved in study and recitation of ved. I am considered to be 
her daughter out of vedic recitation. My name is Vedvati. Coming of age, several 
celestials and persons of royal heritage sought my hands in marriage. My father declined 
their solicitation, and he had a resolve that I should be married to lord Vishnu only. 
Getting angry over my father, the demon king Shambhu, killed him. My mother also 
followed the suite, and rose to the pyre of my father. Thereafter I resolved to fulfil the 
wish of my father and undertook the penance here.” 

Ravan was overwhelmed by her beauty, and coming down from pushpak , he asked her 
to become his life partner. He also mentioned, “Who is this Vishnu? I am the sovereign 
master of the earth, and nobody will provide you better honour and comfort than I can 
provide." She countered his plea, “Lord Vishnu is the sole sovereign of the universe. The 
universe bows down over his feet. None can dare ignore him as you do.” Ravan couldn’t 
wait further, and he held her hair. She was so aggrieved that from the power of the 
penance, she used her hand as a sharp sword, and cut off the hair, releasing herself 


Page 13 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


from the grip of the Ravan’s hands. She also mentioned, “Although I can burn you to 
ashes, but I won’t spoil my penance. I now would enter fire, but I curse you that your end 
will come because of me when I am born again.” Saying that she offered herself to fire, 
and flowers showered around her from sky. 

In the next birth she was born over a lotus, and Ravan picked her up as a nascent child, 
and brought her to his palace. The astrologers warned Ravan, “The child has inimical 
signs against you. She should not be reared up in the palace.” Ravan preferred to 
discard the child. 

The same child, appeared from the ploughshare when Janak tilled the land under the 
ritual of a ygya. As fire appears in a ygya, she also appeared from the surface of the 
earth. Subsequently, she became known as Sita. 

7-18 Ravan defeated Marutt (36 / 769) 

While moving over earth riding pushpak, Ravan once arrived in the country of Ushirbij. 
The king of the country Marutt was engaged in maheshwar ygya. In presence of gods, 
Samvart, brother of Bruhaspati, conducted the ygya as chief priest. Scared by the 
presence of Ravan, gods assumed the body of birds: Indra as peacock, Yam as crow, 
Varun as royal swan, and Kuber as girgit (chameleon). 

Coming to Marutt, Ravan asked, “Either fight with me or say you are defeated.” When 
the king enquired his identity, he laughed and mentioned, “I am younger brother of 
Kuber. This pushpak I have grabbed from him.” Condemning his impudence the king 
said, “My arrows would soon dispatch you to the death world." 

Samvart, interfering mentioned to the king, “For you maheshwar ygya is of utmost 
priority, and you need to continue with this rather divert your attention. While resolved for 
this ygya you need not lose your temper. If the ygya remains inconclusive, it will cause 
immense harm to your wellbeing.” Consenting to Samvart’s advice, Marutt withdrew, and 
Shuk, demon minister of Ravan, blew the victory conch in favour of Ravan. The demon 
Ravan, killed and devoured the sages who had arrived in ygya. He left riding pushpak. 

After his departure, gods regained their original form and blessed the birds. Indr 
blessing to peacock said, “Your blue body shall now be made more attractive by marks 
of my thousand eyes over the wings. You are now free from the fear of snakes. During 
rains you will attain great pleasure in looking at the clouds in the sky.” 

Yam blessed crow, “If not killed by anyone you will not die of any disease. The oblation 
of food and cereals offered by those on earth meant for their dead forefathers will be 
received through your satisfaction.” 

Varun blessed royal swan, “The front edge of your wings is blue, and the portion of the 
body between the wings is of grass colour. From today your entire body shall be 
pleasing white.” 


Page 14 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Kuber blessed girgit to convert from black to golden complexion. 

7-19 Dying Anaranya cursed Ravan (32 / 801) 

Ravan had made a general announcement to the kings on earth, “Either fight with me or 
accept defeat.” Several kings Dushyant, Surath, Gadhi, Gaya, Pururava and others had 
quietly accepted their defeat. Getting elated by his wide spread sovereignty, he arrived 
in Ayodhya, and asked the king Anaranya to either fight or surrender. The king had 
earlier heard about him, and therefore he had gathered huge army to face Ravan. He 
readily accepted his challenge. In the contingent of forces of Anaranya, there were one 
hundred thousand cavalry, ten thousand elephants, several thousand chariots, and 
scores of infantry. In the battle, the king’s army suffered great casualty. Finally the king 
himself arrived over the battle ground, and defeated the demon ministers Marich, Shuk, 
Saran and Prahast. 

Fighting Ravan, the king shot eight hundred arrows over him, but he didn’t suffer from 
any injury. Answering his charges, Ravan punched a slap, and the king fell down from 
his chariot. While dying the king spoke to Ravan, “Everything takes place as ordained, 
and the same is applicable to me also. But before dying I curse you. Ram, one of my 
descendants, will end your life.” 

7-20 Narad provoked Ravan (33 / 834) 

It so happened that Ravan once saw Narad passing through the sky route. When he 
offered his respects to him, Narad spoke, “I am pleased by your valour and victory. If you 
prefer, I would like to give you one advice. Your performance at earth among the mortal 
humans is noteworthy, but you may think about this. These humans are mortal and are 
afflicted by disease and death. They can never be match to your stature, and therefore 
winning them who are already dead and defeated may not add to your glory. I would 
advise to secure your victory over the god of death, Yam. He is the cause of death, and 
if you have him in your control, you will really be sovereign in the universe.” 

Hearing Narad, Ravan spoke, “I praise your advice, but now I am going to netherworld, 
and after attaining my victory over them, I would prefer to churn ocean to secure nectar.” 

Narad mentioned, “The route you have adopted now is not the convenient route of the 
netherworld. Rather, this route passes through the circuitous and complex yam lok .” 
Ravan accepted his advice and mentioned, “Now I would first tackle Yam, the son of 
sun. The master of death of others shall meet his death today.” 

Saying thus Ravan moved to the south to secure victory over Yam. Narad grew a little 
curious and wanted to see the interesting battle between Ravan and Yam. 


Page 15 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-21 Ravan attacked Yam (46 / 880) 

Before arrival of Ravn, Narad met Yam, who in presence of fire god, was busy in issuing 
decree to the deceased. After being greeted, Narad intimated him about the impending 
attack of Ravan. 

Soon pushapak riding Ravan arrived in yamlok, and took a look at the prevailing scene 
of torture and reward. He also saw the attendants and huge army of Yam. He could then 
notice how people passed though severe penalty of raurava narak and other painful 
tortures. Those who had gifted land, house and cereals over earth, were provided with 
the similar comfort after their death. 

Seeing all over, Ravan interfered in the tortures being afflicted over the deceased ones. 
When he released some of those who were prisoner to the hell, attendants of yam 
became furious. They attacked over Ravan. Gradually the skirmishes turned into a 
holocaust. Large portion of the army of yam met sever casualty. Ravan also suffered 
from severe injuries. His shield was broken, and his body was soaked in blood. Due to 
boon of Brahma, the damage caused to the pushpak was quickly repaired on its own. 

Subsequently Ravan charged pashupat astr. This deadly weapon caused great loss of 
yam army, and they fell as if dry leaves were burnt by fire in summer. Ravan along with 
his ministers made a winsome uproarious sound. 

7-22 Victorious Ravan left Yamlok (51 / 931) 

Hearing the uproars of demons, Yam rushed himself to the battle ground. He was riding 
a chariot, and inside the chariot, on his sides kaldand and kalpash accompanied him. 
He was lead by mrityu. Demons were panicked by the presence of mrityu and they 
deserted the ground. Yam showered several shakti over Ravan, and he was not able to 
counter them. His condition became pitiable. Mustering his mettle, Ravan picked up his 
attack. He charged four arrows over mrityu , and injured the horses by seven shafts. In 
quick succession he showered thousands of arrows over Yam hurting him grievously. 

Soon mrityu and kal sought his permission to eliminate Ravan. Ignoring their solicitation, 
Yam himself picked up his deadliest weapon kaldand. The universe trembled, and gods 
were gripped with fear. Yam was about to hurl the kaldand that Brahma appeared and 
intervened, “I have blessed Ravan immortality against gods. This kaldand is also my 
creation. It is the ultimate weapon, and once hurled it can eliminate the entire universe. 
Honour my words, and don’t kill him.” Yam respected Brahma and withdrew his weapon 
Thereafter, he spoke, “If he has been made immortal against gods, then this battle is 
futile.” Saying thus he disappeared along with his chariot. 

Ravan, ultimately emerged victorious; aboard pushpak , he happily left yamlok. 


Page 16 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-23 Ravan defeated sons of Varun (54 / 985) 

When he left yamlok, his ministers who were brutally injured by Yam, joined him with 
blood soaked body. Consoling, Ravan took them over Pushpak and moved towards the 
netherworld. 

Arriving in Bhogpuri, he subjugated nag. When he entered Manimayapuri, he challenged 
monstrous residents of that place who were known as nivatkavach. They were also 
blessed by Brahma. Soon fierce fighting took place between Ravan and those 
nivatkavach. They were engaged in fighting for over one year without any conclusion. 
Brahma ultimately arrived, and advised nivatkavach to forge friendship with Ravan. He 
mentioned, “Both of you are blessed by me for your immortality, therefore, better 
become friends of each other.” 

The friendship was established in presence of fire god. Ravan receiving their warm 
honour, stayed for over year. During his stay he learnt skill of sorcery from them. 

Further roaming around with an intention to locate the abode of Varun, Ravan happened 
to pass through the city of Ashma inhabited by valorous kalkeya demons. He killed 
those demons, and when his brother-in-law Vidyujihav (husband of Surpanakha) wanted 
to eliminate him using his licking tongue, he cut him in two pieces by his sword. 

Moving forward he located the white shining abode of Varun. Arriving at the palace, he 
first met surabhi, the celestial cow. Incessantly pouring milk from her udder, has made 
the ksheersagar (tfhwR ) 7-23-21. Divine mount nandi ( maha brushabh ) of Mahadev, is 
son of surbhi. Moon being a product of ksheersagar, is also in the lineage of suabhi. 
Ravan first made a respectful round of surbhi, and thereafter, he watched the grandeur 
of Varun's abode. It was beautifully decorated, and streaming natural springs had further 
enhanced its splendour. Subsequently, Ravan asked the guard, “Intimate my arrival to 
Varun. He will either fight with me, or with folded hands he may surrender to me.” 

Hearing Ravan’s message, the sons and grandsons of Varun stormed over him. They 
were lead by Gau and Pushkar. Hair raising fight took place between demons and army 
of Varun. Mighty ministers of Ravan routed the opponents. Due to heavy pounding of 
demons, sons of Varun were also made unconscious. Regaining their consciousness 
they realised that Ravan was riding pushpak, and therefore, they also came riding 
brilliant aerial chariot. They made lethal attack humiliating Ravan to withdraw. Feeling 
victorious they made roaring sound. Mahodar, demon minister of Ravan, couldn’t 
tolerate the humiliation of Ravan, and he resumed the combat with a mace. The fast 
footed horses of their chariot were killed by Mahodar. Ravan also resumed the combat, 
and commenced showering arrows over them. Soon they were made unconscious, and 
their attendants took them away from the battle ground. Ravan made a victorious sound, 
and asked them to send Varun to face him. 


Page 17 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Prabhas, the minister of Varun, came out and spoke to Ravan, “Varun has gone to 
attend a musical consort at Brahma’s place. He is not available, and his army has 
already been routed by you.” Victorious Ravan left the abode of Varun. 

7-24 Surpanakha with Khar in Dandakaranya (42 / 1027) 

While coming back, Ravan forcibly kidnapped several women from the family of kings, 
sages, gandharv and yaksh. They were all aboard with him in pushpak. Their eyes 
welled tears causing flood over pushpak. Throughout the route, they cursed Ravan, 
“Forceful abduction of other’s wives lead to annihilation; a woman will be cause of your 
ultimate end.” Their curse was greeted by celestial shower of flowers and sound of 
drums (7-24-21). 

When Ravan landed in Lanka, his sister Surpnakha welcome him with lamenting words 
tearful eyes. She cried, “While killing kalkeya demons, you killed my husband also. 
Being elder you are like my father. If you can’t provide protection to me, what shall 
happen to my fate." Ravan consoled her, “I lost my reasons, and to secure victory I 
continued charging weapons. The tragedy has occurred in ignorance and by mistake.” 

To keep Surpanakha pleased, he sent her with Khar to Dandakarnya. They were 
accompanied by fourteen thousand dreadful demons. Ravan assured, “Your cousin 
brother Khar would work under your commands, and he will ensure your pleasant living.” 

7-25 Successful ygya of Meghanad (52/ 1052) 

After dispatching Khar to Janasthan, Ravan came on strolling in Nikumbhila grove. He 
noticed Meghanad performing ygya there. Getting close to him he enquired as what was 
he doing. Shukracharya who the chief priest spoke to Ravan, “Meghanad is on vow of 
silence now. He has successfully completed seven ygya: agnishtom, ashvamedh, 
bahusuvarnak, rajsuya, gomedh, vaishnav, and maheshvar. On completion of the last 
ygya, he has been blessed with one divine chariot, tamasi art of sorcery, two quivers full 
of arrows, and a strong bow. Using tamasi he would be able to hide himself surrounded 
by dense fog invisible to others. Soon he would be concluding ygya and would seek 
your blessings.” 

On conclusion Ravan blessed him, but criticized also for appeasing enemy Indr and 
other gods through oblations to them. He later accompanied by them, came to pushpak 
and sought their help in taking down the wailing women. Vibhishan was also present 
there, and he criticized Ravan for his immoral act of kidnapping others wives. He 
mentioned, “Due to your sin, our cousin sister Kumbhinasi had been abducted by a 
demon Madhu from our palace. She is daughter of Malyavan’s daughter, cousin sister 
of our mother. While you were away, I was busy in my penance deep in water, 
Kumbhakarn was sleeping, and Meghanad was on his mission of ygya. In the 
meanwhile Madhu arrived and forcefully took her away.” 

Taking support of Meghanad, Ravan made a move to take revenge from Madhu. When 
he arrived at his place, he couldn’t see him, but his sister Kumbhinasi was present. She 


Page 18 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


appealed to Ravan to spare the life of her husband Madhu. Ravan consented, and 
sought Madhu’s help in charging attack over gods in heaven. Madhu appeared and 
offered respectful greetings to Ravan. Staying there for a night, Ravan moved out in the 
morning to gods abode. On way, in the evening, he halted at Kailas near kurber’s abode. 

7-26 Nalkubar cursed Ravan (60 / 1112) 

While the army was sleeping, Ravan was awake watching the grand natural scene of the 
night, “Sweet music and songs were coming from abode of kuber. Vidyadhar and kinnar 
were out in the moonlit night with their charming consorts. The cool air carried sweet 
fragrance.” Ravan was seized with lustful thoughts. Subsequently he saw, Rambha, a 
charming celestial dancers passing nearby. Obstruction her way, he sought her favour to 
spend her night with him. She was puzzled and submitted to him, “I love Nalkubar, son 
of kuber, and I am going to meet her tonight. I am therefore your daughter-in-law. 
Scriptures prohibit such acts which you intend now.” Ravan rejected her pleading, “The 
celestial dancers don’t belong to a specific person. You are not married to anybody.” 
Subsequently he raped her. 

Pale and sad Rambha, coming to Nalkubar narrated the entire incident. He meditated for 
a while and saw what had happened on way to Rambha. He was seized with anger, and 
taking water in palm, he sanctified his organs with touch of that holy water. 
Subsequently, he cursed Ravan, “Henceforth, if he forcibly enjoys the association of 
women, he will drop dead by his head falling into seven pieces.” To honour his curse, 
heavens showered flowers and celestial drums produced sweet notes (7-26-56). When 
Ravan learnt about the curse, he abjured rape with unwilling women. The chaste women 
imprisoned in his palace, rejoiced the curse. 

7-27 Sumali killed (52/ 1164) 

When Ravan moved towards the gods’ abode intending to humiliate them on battle 
ground, Indr summoned the support of vasu, marudgana and other gods. Scared of 
Ravan, he hastily approached Vishnu, “You had helped us in the past. Now Ravan is 
coming to make attack on us. He has become immortal and invincible by the blessing of 
Brahma. To honour Brahma’s words had become our responsibility. With your active 
support we had earlier defeated Namuchi, Bali, Vrutrasur, Narak, Shambar and others. I 
seek your guidance for you can devise some way out.” 

Chanting his glory Indr mentioned, “You are supreme among gods and refuge to all of 
us. You are eternal universal spirit Narayan, and from your navel lotus has emerged as a 
genesis of the entire creation. It is you who established the three worlds and made me 
chief of gods.” 

Note: 

Shlok 10 and 11 of this sarq 27 of Uttar kand, suggest that universal spirit and supreme among 

gods has one another name Vishnu also. This means, among trinity of gods, when He is referred 

to as in-charge of nourishment to the beings and universe, he is called Vishnu. Otherwise in His 


Page 19 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


entirety, he is Narayan , and for the sake of performance of some feats for overall wellbeing of the 

universe, He assumes the form of Vishnu. Narayan therefore simultaneously has dual and distinct 

role of supreme spirit, as well as that of Vishnu. 

wrpts wwrs / g m wrffar wtms ymmw / / 7 - 27-11 

Further, Indr sought his interference, “Equipped with disc and sword, lead us in 
eradicating this atrocious demon.” 

Vishnu spoke to Indr, “It is not the time of my interference. Later, realising his ominous 
end, I would be a cause to his end, and not now. This is my word to you. You need to 
boldly face him now with the support of other gods.” 

With the passing of night, at the break of dawn, the uproarious arrival of demons were 
heard. Fully prepared, accompanied by rudr, aditya, vasu, marudgan, ashwini kumar and 
other gods Indr came out of Amaravatipuri. 

Demon Sumali (grandfather of Ravan) surrounded by Marich, Prahast, Mahaparshav, 
Mahodar, Akampan, Nikumbh, Shuk, Saran, Sanhlad, Dhumketu, Mahadanshtr, 
Ghatodar, Jambumali, Mahahlad, Virupaksh, Suptaghn, Ygyakop, Durmukh, Dushan, 
Khar, Trishira, Karviraksh, Suryashatru, Mahakaya, Atikaya, Devantak, and Narntaktore 
through the army of gods. Gods were dispersed as if wind had driven out clouds. 

At the same time, Savitr, the eighth vasu, entered the battle ground in favour of gods. He 
was leading a huge army. Coinciding with the Savitr’s fighting, Twasta and Pusha two 
valorous sons of Aditi, came with more reinforcements to the gods. Despite all 
reinforcements gods were not able to face the demons and scared like deer they took to 
their heels. 

Savitr, in great anger, renewed his attack over Sumali. As a strategy, he damaged the 
snakes pulled chariot of Sumaili. When Sumali fought with mace with him, he found a 
chance to pound heavily the head of the demon with his mace. Sumali was crushed 
beyond recognition. 

7-28 Continuing fighting of gods and demons (49 / 1213) 

With the fall of mighty Sumali, Meghanad took over the command over the ground. The 
gods army being brutally assaulted by him left the battle ground. Seeing the retreat of his 
army, Indr encouraged them, “Have patience and come back to the ground. My son 
Jayant would now be with you.” 

With the arrival of Jayant, the fighting took a new turn. Gods measured well with the 
demons. Meghanad was directly facing Jayant. He tried to damage the chariot of Jayant 
being driven by Gomukh (son of Matali, charioteer of Indr). Invoking his sorcery 
Meghanad caused pitch darkness over the ground. Constrained by marred visibility, 
gods were killing gods, and demons were killing demons. 


Page 20 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


In the meanwhile Puloma, a warrior demon, who happened to be maternal grandfather 
of Jayant, kidnapped Jayant and entered deep ocean. When Indr heard about the 
mysterious disappearing of Jayant, he arrived over the battle ground to take over the 
command. He was supported by rudra and marudgana. They caused a great casualty of 
the demons. Kumbhakarn was engaged in wilful fighting. Because of the influence of 
liquor, he was not able to discriminate between gods and demons. He continued killing 
whoever fell in his sight. Rudr caused major injury to Kumbhakarn, and other demons 
also. 

With the arrival of Indr , Ravan himself joined the demons to face the gods and 
Meghanad was asked to retire in his chariot. This time, the gods had proved superior to 
demons. Ravan steered through the gods to face directly Indr. Both were engaged in 
fierce fighting. There were only arrows and arrows flying in all quarters. 

In the meanwhile pitch darkness dawned over the ground. 

7-29 Meghanad arrested Indr (42 / 1255) 

Under the pall of darkness, the fighting further picked up. Only one tenth of demons 
army survived. Except Indr, Ravan and Meghanad others were deterred by the 
darkness. Realising major loss of his army, Ravan asked his charioteer to take him 
tearing through one end of gods army to the other end. At that time gods army was 
sprawled over the large area beginning from nandan van of Amravatipun to Udayachal. 

When Ravan entered alone through the north side of the gods army, Indr advised gods 
to arrest him. He mentioned, “Bali being put in bonds, we were allowed to enjoy the 
comfort of heaven. Ravan can’t be killed because of Brahma’s boon. Therefore, let us 
arrest him and put in prison.” 

In the meanwhile, Meghanad joined the demons. Resorting to the skill of sorcery he was 
not visible, and he continued dreadful shots over Indr. While Indr was not able to locate 
him, he caused grievous injury to Matali. Indr had to quit the chariot, and use airavat, his 
elephant mount. Meghanad got a chance to imprison Indr, and carried him in his chariot. 
He spoke to Ravan, “We need not continue fighting now. I have arrested Indr. Let us go 
back to Lanka.” 

Ravan was extremely happy with his performance and they soon returned to Lanka. In 
absence of his leader, gods also lost the guidance, and they sadly gathered to devise 
some way out for his release. 

7-30 Indr released (54 / 1309) 

Surrounded by gods, Brahma arrived over Lanka, and staying afloat in sky, he praised 
the valour of Meghanad. He mentioned, “I am highly impressed by his performance. 
Ravan ! you have got a son superior to you. As coveted by you, all the three worlds have 
accepted defeat, and surrendered to you. From today Meghanad should be called by 


Page 21 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


another name Indrjeet. I am here to seek release of Indr. What boon Meghanad expects 
in lieu of Indr?" 

Answering to Brahma’s appeal, Meghanad demanded immortality. Brahma with sweet 
words impressed upon him, “No creature of the universe can stay alive for ever. This is 
beyond my jurisdiction, I can’t commit this boon to you." 

Meghanad then demanded, “Every time, I make a move to battle ground, I would 
perform oblation in fire. Let an impregnable chariot appear out of fire. So long as I am 
aboard that chariot I should be immune to death. Whenever I fail to perform an oblation 
and move to fight without seeking fresh chariot, my enemy may cause my end.” 

Brahma granted this boon to him, and released Indr. Sad and pale Indr accompanied by 
gods moved to heavens. Brahma reminded him for his lapse in maintaining austerity in 
the past, and that has caused the ignominious situation to him. 

Saying this Brahma narrated the incident in detail, “In order to differentiate between the 
similarity of creation, I created the first woman extremely beautiful, and she was Ahalya. 
All gods including you craved to possess her. I didn’t handover to any of you, rather I 
gave her to Gautam asking him take care of his chastity. Gautam demonstrated his 
accomplished austerity and he brought her back to me when I asked for her. Impressed 
by his saintly mind, I again handed over Ahalya to him as his wife. You carried the lust 
for her, and consequently you raped her in absence of Gautam. When he arrived, he 
cursed you to be trapped by the enemy during fighting. He also reminded you that such 
sin has been initiated by you, and therefore this will become a common practice 
hereafter. The half of such sin shall befall over the sinner, and the balance sin will come 
in your share. Thus with accumulation of sins of others, the position of Indr shall not be a 
property of one person, rather, it would be replaced by other Indr in succession.” 

Continuing further the story of Ahalya, Brahma said, “ Gautam cursed Ahalya to become 
invisible, shorn of her charm and beauty. The sage mentioned to her that until now she 
was alone with such a charming physique, but henceforth scores of beings would be 
made beautiful like her. Ahalya pleaded her innocence that Indr was with her in the 
sage’s disguise. She didn’t know he was Indr, and her indulgence was not her fault. The 
sage had mercy on her. He assured her, when Vishnu would incarnate as Ram, while 
coming with Brahmins, he would exonerate her from that sin. Thereafter she would be 
able to join him again. Thereafter the sage entered his hermitage and Ahalya undertook 
a severe penance.” 

Reminding Indr of his sin, Brahma asked him to perform vaishnav ygya to regain his lost 
grace. As advised Indr performed the vaishnav ygya and subsequently went to heavens 
to occupy his seat. 


Page 22 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-31 Ravan to king Arjun (44 / 1353) 

Hearing Agastya on Ravan’s valour, Ram enquired, “During the period of Ravan it 
seems the earth was devoid of any king measuring to his stature.” Agastya laughed and 
narrated the story of Ravan’s visit to king of Mahishamatipuri. 

When Ravan arrived to Mahishmatipuri, he asked the royal guard to inform the king 
Arjun of his arrival. He subsequently learnt that king Arjun was out of station. Thereafter, 
he came over vindhya mountain. Bewildered by natural scenic beauty of the mighty 
peaks of mountain vindhya , he happened to arrive at the bank of Narmada river. He was 
impressed by natural scenery of the river which flew westward towards sea. He advised 
his accompanying demons to take bath and relax since they were soaked with blood and 
tired of fighting. Ravan also took bath, and his ministers gathered white flower for the 
worship of Mahadev. He used to carry a shivaling (phallus in stone) always with him. 
Installing the shivaling over a high pedestal of sand, he commenced the worship of the 
deity. 

7-32 Arjun arrested Ravan (73 / 1426) 

Arjun was engaged in water game a little down stream over Narmada. He was blessed 
with one thousand hands, and using his mighty hands he stopped the flow of Narmada. 
Soon the river water flew in reverse direction towards upstream. Ravan worship place 
was on upstream and his place got submerged in water flowers drifting away with the 
rive stream. He was midway of his worship, therefore maintaining silence, he indicated 
his ministers to find out the cause of reverse flow in the river. 

Shuk and Saran who had been to find out the cause, came back and narrated, “A huge 
person equipped with thousand hands has put a dam over the flow.” Ravan confirmed 
about Arjun and he moved to challenge him for a fight. Arriving at the scene, Ravan 
asked the attendants to Arjun to inform him about his challenge. The kings attendants 
spoke to Ravan, “You seem to be unaware of conduct rule of fight. When my master is 
enjoying water game with his beloved, you are asking him for a duel. Wait for tonight and 
tomorrow you may test your strength. Or, else if you are so excited, you can proceed to 
him after defeating us.” 

Hungry ministers of Ravan hawked over the attendants and ate them alive. The guards 
of the king Arjun took up the challenge and fierce fighting began with the demons. Some 
of the attendants informed Arjun about the incident. The king, taking his beloved women 
in confidence came out of the water and thrashed the demons. First victim was Prahast 
who pounded by his mace, fell unconscious over ground. Afraid of his strength, other 
demons ran away. Subsequently, Ravan and Arjun were engaged in dreadful duel. It 
was an interesting sight when one thousand hands were engaged fighting twenty hands. 
They fought for some time, but Arujun getting hold of Ravan tied him with strong rope as 
Narayan had tied demon king Bali (7-32-64). On the victory of Arjun, gods showered 
flowers over him. 


Page 23 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


When Arjun came back to his kingdom carrying the tied Ravan with him, citizens 
rejoiced the sight of a tied demon having ten heads and twenty hands. 

7-33 Pulastya helped release of Ravan (23 / 1449) 

Pulastya overheard gods mentioning about tying up of Ravan by Arjun. The bond of 
affection to his grandson, drew the sage Pulastya to the earth. When he landed near 
Mahishpatipuri, and moved on foot towards the king Arjun’s palace, the king’s attendants 
informed him about his arrival. The king keeping Brahmins in front, having auspicious 
materials for worship, came forward extending warm welcome to the sage. After offering 
padya, argaha, madhupark (7-33-9) and cows, the king submitted to the sage, “To day 
by your presence this Mahishmatipuri is like Amravatipuri. I am really fortunate, and my 
penance has borne fruits, when I welcome you here. What is your command for me?” 

The sage was highly pleased with Arjun’s greetings. Enquiring about his wellbeing, and 
status of sacrifices etc, he praised his strength, “You are mighty and invincible. Ravan 
was proud of his potential but he had been humiliated badly. I seek his release.” 

The king Arjun released Ravan immediately, and honouring him gift of royal dress and 
jewels, forged the bond of friendship keeping fire god as witness. Pulastya embraced 
Ravan, but he was ashamed of his humiliation. Pulastya, thereafter left for brahmalok , 
and Ravan departed on his mission. 

7-34 Vali humiliated Ravan (46 / 1495) 

Moving over earth to find his match Ravan once arrived at Kishkindha. He asked for a 
fight. Vali was not there, and his minister Tar, Sushen and prince Angad told him to wait 
for some time for return of Vali. They also advised that if he was pressed for time he 
might go and see him on south sea. Riding pushpak Ravan arrived at south sea and saw 
Vali engaged in sandhyopasan (morning ritual of worship). At that time Vali looked like a 
golden rising sun. 

Ravan, subduing the sound of his footsteps, moved towards Vali with an intention to 
arrest him. Vali also saw him, but he continued his worship ignoring his presence as 
garud ignores a snake. But Vali could sense his bad intention, and maintained total 
alertness. The moment Ravan was about to extend his hand to catch Vali, the monkey 
king grabbed him and pressed him within his armpits. Vali then leapt up in sky and 
stormed towards the west sea. Ravan’s ministers tried to help Ravan but they were not 
able to follow Vali. 

Keeping Ravan in the armpit, Vali completed the morning ritual at north sea also. 
However, Ravan also tried in vain to injure Vali with his nails and teeth. Finally coming to 
Kishkindha, Vali released Ravan and asked him, “From where did you come? Ravan 
introduced himself and praised rare potential of Vali, “I am astonished to see your 
potential and speed of movement. Without getting tired you carried me like an animal to 
all the four extreme ends of earth. Your speed is like mind, garud and vayu. I had come 
to invite your for duel but have been duly answered. I extend hand of friendship to you. 


Page 24 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Keeping witness of fire they forged the bond of friendship. Ravan stayed with Vali at 
Kishkindha for a month enjoying royal honour like Sugriv. 

7-35 Advent of Hanuman (65 / 1560) 

Hearing the valour of Vali, Ram surprisingly mentioned, “Hanuman is mightier than 
Ravan and Vali together. He performed the feat of crossing sea, meeting Sita in the 
inner protected zone, releasing himself from the fetter of Indrajeet, burnt Lanka. On his 
strength I had been able to achieve the target of killing Ravan, crowing Vibhishan, 
meeting Sita, reviving the life of Lakshaman, got the kingdom of Ayodhya. Being in 
possession of such a rare potential, I wonder why didn’t he give relief to Sugriv against 
the torture of Vali." 

Agastya mentioned, “In the childhood he was cursed by the sages that he will remain 
forgetful about his own strength. Unless somebody reminds him of his strength, he will 
not be able to take up any challenging assignment.” Speaking thus Agastya narrated the 
entire life profile of Hanuman to Ram. 

Kesari was a renowned monkey staying at Meru mount. His wife was Anjana, and she 
gave birth to Hanuman by mental resolve of vayu god. Once in the morning, she was out 
to procure fruits, and Hanuman felt hungry. Looking in the sky, he mistook rising sun as 
some fruit and leapt to grab it. Vayu god also followed him bringing down the 
temperature around him to icy cold state. This saved him against the burning sun. It was 
amavasya day (15 th day of dark fortnight), and rahu had his due for eclipse of the sun. 
Presence of Hanuman foiled his bid to afflict sun. He came rushing to Indr and 
complained, “On your command I used to afflict sun, but someone else has grabbed this 
opportunity.” 

Indr mounting his airavat (elephant mount), rushed to the site. Rahu speedily moved 
ahead of Indr. Looking at rahu , Hanuman considered moving rahu to be another fruit. 
Leaving the sun, he jumped over rahu. Consequently rahu cried for help. Indr rushed 
towards him for his safety. In the meanwhile moving airvat looked like another fruit to 
Hanuman, and leaving rahu he grabbed airavat. To bring him in control, Indr charged 
his bolt, causing Hanuman to fall down over a mountain. Hanuman’s left chin was 
broken, and Vayu god got displeased by such an action of Indr. 

Taking Hanuman in his lap, he confined himself in a cave. The movement of air ceased, 
and the beings of the universe including celestials felt suffocation. Due to inactive air and 
breathing, the disposal of natural excretion of the beings halted, causing great 
discomfort to all. In absence of air, the fires of the oblation squares were extinguished. 
Sacred rituals, and study of scriptures were discontinued. 

Scared of a major unknown catastrophe, gods collectively approached Brahma and 
complained about the life costing discomfort. Brahma spoke to them, “Vayu is an 
invisible life force ever present in the beings. To provide safeguard to rahu, Indr hit his 
son Hanuman, and with his broken chin Hanuman has become lifeless. Angry vayu has 


Page 25 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


withdrawn with Hanuman in a cave. We have to please him by our persuasion lest this 
world meets its end soon.” 

Coming to vayu god, Brahma had a look at Hanuman, “Seeing his brilliant golden face 
he felt pity for the child and expressed his compassion." 

7-36 Hanuman got blessed (63 / 1623) 

Seeing arrival of Brahma, vayu moved forward with Hanuman in his lap. In a respectful 
gesture, vayu fell over his feet. Brahma raised him up, and moved his hand over the 
child. Seeing Hanuman back to his life, vayu was highly pleased. His pleasure revived 
the dynamism among beings. Subsequently Brahma addressed the gods, “I understand 
you all are aware about this child, who will prove immensely beneficial in future to the 
wellbeing the gods.” 

Enlightened by Brahma, Indr put a lotus garland around his neck and blessed him, “His 
left chin is broken, and therefore, he will be called Hanuman. In future he will be immune 
to any injury of my bolt.” 

Sun god blessed him, “He will have one hundredth of my brightness. Later, I will teach 
him scriptures and he would emerge an influential speaker.” 

Varun blessed him, “Even after the age of one million years, he will have no fear from 
my chain, and will never meet his end because of water.” 

Yam blessed him to be long living and immune to his weapon. Kuber made him immune 
to his mace. Shankar ensured his immunity against all his weapons. Viswakarma 
blessed him a long life and made him fearless from all of the weapons made by him. 

Blessing Hanuman, Brahma addressed vayu, “Your son will have a long life, and none 
of the brahmdand would be able to afflict him. Later, he will be of great help to Ram, in 
killing Ravan. I bless him to be endowed with the rare potential to assume any desired 
form, and he can move to any place at his desired speed.” 

When Brahma went back with gods, vayu carried him to Anjana and narrated the entire 
incident. He left Hanuman in her care. 

Gradually, elated of his potential, Hanuman caused lot of irritation to the sages. He used 
to destroy the ygya materials, by breaking the ladles and tearing apart the robes of the 
sages. They were aware of blessings of Brahma and gods, and therefore couldn’t 
penalise him. Anjana and vayu had also forbade him umpteen times for troubling the 
sages. Later, one day the sages of angira and bhrugu dynasty cursed him, “You will 
forget your potential unless somebody reminds you.” Thereafter he behaved well with 
the sages and was found in quiet and calm state of mind. 

Clearing the doubt Agastya spoke to Ram, “Riksharaja was a famous monkey king. Vali 
and Sugriv were his sons. When he died, Vali was made the king and Sugriva was the 
regent prince. Later, when Vali became cruel to Sugriv, neither Hanuman recalled his 


Page 26 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


potential, nor he was reminded by Sugriv. Thus Sugriv continued his distressed life over 
rishyamuk." 

Agastya further highlighted the special qualities of Hanuman, “While learning scriptures 
from sun, he used to move backward keeping him on his front. His knowledge is 
comparable to the knowledge of Bruhaspati." 

Mentioning about other monkeys, Agastya spoke to Ram, “Sugriv, Maind, Dwvid, Neel, 
Taar, Angad, Nal, Gaj, Gavaksh, Sudanshtr, Prabh, Jyotimukh and others are born from 
the part of various gods.” 

Before leaving Agasty expressed his satisfaction and happiness for getting glimpse of 
Ram, and talking to him for long. Before he left, Ram invited him again during the 
forthcoming ygya, “I am fortunate to enjoy your association. After settling the people in 
their duties, I would initiate ygya soon. I pray all the sages to grace the occasion 
incessantly with their presence.” 

Subsequently seeking leave of the kings and monkeys and Ram performed the evening 
worship and retired to his palace later during night. 

7-37 Ram in royal court (24 / 1647) 

It was first night following the coronation of Ram in day hours. Before arrival of evening 
he was benefited by the presence of sages lead by Agastya. Later at night he retired to 
relax. Before he was awake, royal bards chanted his glory, “You are endowed with the 
endurance of earth, and brilliance of sun. In valour you are Vishnu, and in knowledge 
you are Bruhaspati. You have speed of vayu, and vastness of sea. Your face is sweet 
like moon. Fame and splendour are your eternal attendants.” 

Rising from bed, Ram completed his normal routine of bath etc and went to the family 
temple to worship the deities. After his return from temple, he was greeted by Vashishth 
and other Brahmins. Subsequently, he occupied his royal seat in their presence. Bharart, 
Lakshaman, and Shatrughn took their position happily as if three ved had been attending 
the performance of ygya. Several ever smiling attendants were on their position to attend 
his call. Sugriv with twenty monkeys, and Vibhishan with four ministers took their 
respective seats. The vassal kings occupied their respectful position near the royal 
throne. 

7-38 Farewell to Janak and others (33 / 1680) 

Ram continued spending his time following the daily routine of attending the royal court. 
After sometime, he requested Janak, “It was my good luck that you arrived and stayed 
with us so long. Now you may leave for Mithilapuri, accompanied by Bharat and 
Shatrughn.” The king Janak appreciated his sweet behaviour and expressed, “I had 
great privilege to be with you here.” Ram offered him precious gifts, but the king didn’t 
take them and advised them to be possessed by Sita. Later he left for Mithilapuri. 


Page 27 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


The maternal uncle and prince regent of Kaikeya desh, Yudhajit had stayed for long. 
Ram bade farewell to him and offered him precious gifts. Lakshaman was to accompany 
him to his kingdom. Yudhajit gave a round of Ram. He left for his place, and he gifted 
back the precious items to the royal possession. 

Close friend of Ram was Pratardan, the king of Varanasi. With precious gifts he was 
given warm farewell. 

There were over four hundred kings gathered at Ayodhya on the call of Bharat. They had 
arrived to avenge the abduction of Sita, but with the return of victorious Ram, they were 
also bade warm farewell. 

7-39 Gifts to Ram (30 / 1710) 

While getting back to their places, those kings chatted, “Bharat gave us late information. 
We had been deprived of enjoying the scene of fighting Ram with demons. Had we 
reached there in time, we could have secured the victory much earlier.” 

After reaching their places, they sent fabulous gifts of gold, gems, coral pieces, pearls, 
chariots, elephants, horses, goats and sheep to Ram. Receiving those gifts, Ram 
distributed them liberally among his monkey and bear friends. 

Ram and Lakshaman drew Hanuman and Angad to his lap and gave them special gifts 
taking off from his body. Similarly he embraced the chiefs Nal, Neel, Maind etc one by 
one and handed over valuable gifts to them. He praised them for their invaluable help in 
securing victory over Ravan. They had been staying in Ayodhya for over a month (7-39- 
27), and it was second month of shishir ritu ( magh and falgun months) (7-39-30) of their 
stay. 

In common practice, a shwin shukl dashami (tenth day of bright fortnight of ashwin, post rainy month) is celebrated as victory day of 
Ram. If on panchami (6-124-1) he was at Bhardwaj asharam, then the dashami has to be understood with a greater rationality. In 
sarg 92, shlok 66, Ravan is seen talking to his minister on chaturdashi, i.e., 14 day of the dark fortnight. Using this as datum, Ram 
talking to Bharadwaj, in sarg 124, on panchmi appears to be consistent. The panchmi is definitely of bright fortnight (but not 
mentioned in valmiki whether dark or bright), because Ravan was the last post who had faught on amavasya. The following day of 
his stay at Bhardwaj ashram, i.e., on 6 th day of bright fortnight Ram arrived in Ayodhya. There could be a possibility that his 
coronation was conducted on 10 th day of the bright fortnight. In some part of India (Puri, Srimandirof lord Jagannath), coronation of 
Lord Ram is celebtrated on vaishakh, krishn navami (9 th day of dark fortnight of vaishakh). 

The references in 7-39-37 / 40 suggest that by all imagination victory date can't precede the month of Agahan during hemant ritu or 
winter months, and not in the sharad months of aswin and kartik. The search mission of Sita would have consumed upto kartik, 
because the south team was afraid of delay already made by them over the allotted period of one month by Sugriv. It seems around 
Kartik amavasya i.e., on deepavali day Hanumanjee brought news to Ram about Sita. Ravan was thus killed on Agahan amavasya, 
and lord Ram was crowned on Agahan shukla shashthi. 

This is justified by the birth of lav kush in shravan i.e., 9 th month (refer 7-66-13). A reference to 7-42-26 / 30 has also pertinent 
relevance. 

7-40 Farewell to monkeys and bears (31 / 1741) 

It was the time of farewell to monkeys and bears. Ram spoke to Sugriv, “You should 
now go back to Kishkindha, and look after the affairs of the kingdom. I understand 


Page 28 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Angad, Hanuman and other chiefs i.e. , Jambvan, Maind, Neel etc., shall continue 
receiving your deep affection.” 

Embracing Vibhishan he wished, “You are a righteous person by birth, and will rule the 
citizens following the rules of moral conduct.” 

While they were being bid farewell, Hanuman sought a favour from him, “Let my interest 
in hearing and chanting your glory be maintained, until the earth exists. Bless me to 
maintain this body, which has been used for your service.” 

Ram assured him, “My legend would be in prevalence, as long as the life of this planet. 
You will also retain your body until the prevalence of my legend. I am so much grateful to 
you that for your every act I will have to sacrifice my body. Thus I shall ever remain 
obliged to you, and won’t be ever able to payback your obligation.” 

He embraced Hanuman closely, and offered his own pearl garland around his neck. 

Honoured by Ram, the monkeys and bears, left Ayodhya with welling tears in their eyes. 

7-41 Coming back of pushpak (22 / 1763) 

Once while Ram was in royal court, he heard a voice from the sky, “Look towards me, I 
am pushpak. You had sent me back to kuber, but he has asked me to serve you. His 
logic is that your victory over Ravan has ensured the victory over pushpak also. This 
means I shall be at your call for ever.” 

Welcoming back to Ayodhya, Ram honourd pushpak with auspicious materials. 
Thereafter he mentioned, “Now you are free, and come whenever I remember you. 
Hearing his command, pushpak disappeared. 

Subsequently Bharat pointing out the special features of the reign of Ram, spoke to him, 
“Since your coronation, no one is deprived of good health. Women deliver child without 
difficulty. There is no incident of premature death. The land yield adequate cereals. 
Clouds rain in time, and air is always pleasant and soothing.” 

7-42 Ram in royal grove (36 / 1799) 

After the day’s royal obligations, Ram accompanied by Sita used to enjoy the natural 
scene of royal grove called Ashok vanika. The grove had varieties of fruits and flower 
bearing trees. A well maintained lake had presence of chirping birds. Sweet song and 
music were presented while Ram spent time in the grove. 

In normal routine, first half in court and late afternoon was spent in grove. Sita also used 
to attend the mother queens in the forenoon, and later fully dressed accompanied Ram 
in Aahok vanika. Thus shishir ritu had come to an end (7- 42 -26). Later, Ram noticed 
the sign of pregnancy over Sita. He greeted her, and enquired, “You will be delivering 
child after some time. Do you have any wish?" Sita expressed her desire to visit the 


Page 29 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


hermitage of the sages on the bank of the gangs, and wished to spend one night there. 
Ram assured to send her next day to the place of her interest. 

7-43 Friends reminder to Ram (23 / 1822) 

Ram was benefited by the company of his friends: Vijay, Madhumatt, Kashyap, Mangal, 
Kul, Suraji, Kaliya, Bhadr, Dantvaktr, and Sumagadh. They used to narrate humorous 
stories to him. In course of his sitting with them, he also gathered the citizens impression 
about himself. Once he specifically enquired from Bhadr, “Which topic are most 
discussed among people?” Bhadr spoke to him, “Crossing the sea, forging friendship 
with monkeys and bears, and killing Ravan are often repeated topics.” 

When Ram specifically enquired about the most critical issue, Bhadr spoke with folded 
hands, “Acceptance of Sita is normally questioned by people. She was forcefully lifted by 
Ravan, and stayed for long in his inner grove. How did Ram accept her?” 

Ram enquired, in this regard, from other friends, and all of them bowing low to his feet 
confirmed what Bhadr had mentioned. 

7-44 Ram in union with brothers (21 / 1843) 

Ram was agitated over the public criticism about Sita. He immediately sent for his three 
brothers. When the guard informed Lakshaman to be present to Ram, he rushed riding 
his chariot. The guard came to Bharat, and informed him to be present at Ram’s palace; 
he quickly moved on foot. Similarly, Shatrughn, when heard about his summon, he 
saluted Ram bowing low on ground, and moved to his palace. 

On information of the arrival of three brothers, Ram asked to usher them in. When they 
were before Ram, they noticed the agitated mind of Ram, and his eyes were moist with 
tears. Ram welcoming them gave proper seat, and mentioned that he would discuss with 
them a very critical issue. All the three brothers were in suspense. 

7-45 Lakshaman to drop Sita beyond gangs (25 / 1868) 

Ram divulged his anxiety to them, “I have learnt about a public criticism about Sita. 
Lakshaman knows how I had asked her to prove her chastity. She was found chaste and 
holy by fire god. Indr and other gods offered back Sita to me as she was pure and no 
malice had touched her. Now I hear public expressing their apprehension about her. I 
know her chastity, but for the sake of public criticism I am not able to retain her with me.” 

Ram directed Lakshaman, “Tomorrow morning you take her and drop her beyond 
ganga. On the bank of Tamasa, there is hermitage of Valmiki.” 

He further mentioned, “I don’t prefer any debate from you. My decision of deserting her 
is final. She has expressed her desire today to visit hermitage of the sages on the bank 
of ganga. Her desire will thus be fulfilled. For my sake, I give you swear in my name, that 
don’t express your any opinion to me in this regard.” 


Page 30 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


With tearful eyes, they all dispersed. 

7-46 Sita on the ganga bank (33 / 1901) 

Next day in the morning, Lakshaman asked Sumantr to bring a chariot for taking Sita to 
ganga. The chariot was brought and Lakshaman informed Sita, “Yesterday you had 
expressed your desire to Ram about your desire to see the hermitages on ganga bank. 
The chariot is ready." 

Sita happily collected some precious gifts for the wives of the sages and boarded the 
chariot with Lakshaman. When the chariot moved forward, Sita mentioned, “I notice 
some bad omens. My right eye pulsates, and I feel lack of inner excitement. The earth 
appears to be lonely and deserted. Let there be all auspiciousness.” Lakshaman also 
wished auspicious future. 

Subsequently they arrived on the bank of gomati, and spent the night there. Next day 
resuming the journey by noon time they arrived on the bank of ganga. Lakshaman burst 
into tears. Consoling him Sita spoke, “You can’t bear the separation from Ram for a 
single day. We will not stay longer. In a day after meeting the sages we will go back to 
Ayodhya.” 

When Lakshaman asked for the boat to take them across, it was soon made ready. 

7-47 Sita across ganga (18 / 1919) 

Lakshaman advised Sumantr, “Wait until I come back.” Boarding the boat, they were 
soon taken across ganga. Showing the hermitages of the sages, Lakshaman wept 
bitterly, and he fell over the feet of Sita, “I seek immediate end of my life. Ram asked me 
to perform this disgraceful job for which I shall ever be condemned.” 

Sita couldn’t understand what Lakshaman meant. She spoke to him, “I don’t understand 
your words. Is Ram in good health? This is my order tell me the truth.” 

Lakshaman divulged, “Learning about public condemnation of your stay in Lanka he has 
deserted you. Altough fire god has sanctified you, but the public keep on condemning 
your acceptance. Consequently Ram had deserted you.” 

Encouraging Sita Lakshaman mentioned, “In the close vicinity from here there lies the 
hermitage of Valmiki who is friend of our father. You should seek shelter there, and 
discarding all fear, keep meditating on Ram.” 

7-48 Sita deserted (26 / 1945) 

The words of Lakshaman caused great shock to Sita, and she fell unconscious over 
ground. Regaining her senses, she spoke, “There seems to be no end of my ill luck. I 
spent the tough life of forest for the pleasure of my husband. I was abducted by the 
demon and had to remain there immersed in sorrow of separation from Ram. The public 
denunciation of my stay in Lanka has caused further agony of separation from Ram. I 


Page 31 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


could have ended my life in ganga but I am reminded of my responsibility of protecting 
the royal heritage. I am pregnant and I can’t do that. Convey my palm folded respects to 
queen mothers and Ram. He should always adhere to righteousness so that his image is 
not blemished.” 

Lakshaman couldn’t speak any word, and falling on her feet in reverence, left the place 
with tears in his eyes. Coming soon across ganga, he boarded the chariot in great 
agony. He kept looking towards her while the chariot was departing away and away. He 
was out of sight, and Sita fell in swoon. Her agony had culminated high finding no 
immediate refuge to her. 

7-49 Sita met Valmiki (23 / 1968) 

Children of the sages saw Sita weeping alone. They informed Valmiki, “The woman has 
rare beauty of goddess Lakshmi and she weeps bitterly. She is alone sitting on the bank 
of ganga. She is in need of some shelter.” Valmiki through his mediation come to know 
the details. Carrying holy water pot he arrived where Sita was weeping. He spoke to 
her, “ You are wife of Ram, daughter in law of Dasarath, and daughter of Janak. I have 
come to know all about you from my meditation. Ram has deserted you without your 
fault. Don’t worry, accept this arghya of holy water, and come with me. Several women 
sages are engaged in penance here. They will take your proper care.” 

She fell on his feet, and thereafter followed him. When women sages saw Valmiki 
coming to them, they welcome him and asked the wellbeing in sweet words. Valmiki 
narrated all about Sita to them. They happily greeted Sita in their fold, and Valmiki left for 
his hermitage. 

7-50 Sumantr disclosed the secret prediction (20 / 1988) 

Lakshaman was shocked to see Sita entering the hermitage. He spoke to Sumantr, “ 
Ram has a rare life profile. He has always been put to test, and have suffered miserably. 
On the words of his father, he spent fourteen years in forest. Now on public 
denunciation, he is without wife. This is called luck.” 

Hearing the words of Lakshaman, Sumantr divulged, “Long back Durvasa had disclosed 
in presence of king Dasarath and guru Vashishth that Ram would always suffer from the 
separation of his near and dear ones. He has deserted Sita, and later he will desert you, 
Bharat and Shtrughn also. Although the king had forbade me to disclose this to anybody, 
I can’t help, and I can tell you the detail. You should not disclose it to Bharat and 
Shatrughn.” 

7-51 Durvasa’s disclosure (30 / 2018) 

Once during four months of rainy season Durvasa stayed with Vashishath. King 
Dasarath happened to meet the sages together. Offering his respect in the feet of the 
sage Durvasa, Dasarath enquired about Ram, “How long Ram will live? How long his 
sons will live? I am curious to know about the details of my other sons.” 


Page 32 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Durvasa narrated the story of the curse of Bhrugu. During the war of gods and demons, 
during the incarnation of Vaman bhagwan, demons took shelter at the hermitage 
Bhrugu. Out of compassion, the sage’s wife provided them refuge. When Vishnu came 
to know about this, he cut the head of the sage’s wife. The sage was shocked and he 
cursed Vishnu, “You will suffer from separation of wife.” When the sage performed 
penance, Vishnu appeared and assured the sage about accepting his curse. 

Durvasa continued, “ Ram is incarnation of Vishnu and he will suffer from separation of 
wife. He will rule for eleven thousand years before departing to his divine abode. He will 
coronate his two son out of Ayodhya.” 

Disclosing the prediction of Durvasa, Sumantr consoled Lakshaman, “Don’t lament, it is 
all ordained.” With quiet mind they spent their night at Keshini river. 

7-52 Lakshaman encouraged Ram (19 / 2037) 

Leaving Keshini in the morning Lakshaman arrived by noon at Ayodhya. He was 
worried, “What shall I convey to Ram?" 

Getting down from the chariot straightway he entered the chamber of Ram. He found 
him immersed in sorrow and his eyes shed tears. Lakshaman submitted, “To obey your 
command I dropped holy and worthy Sita on the bank of ganga near the sages 
hermitage. Afraid of public denunciation you deserted her, if you continue in sorrow, 
people will further denounce your weakness for Sita. You have to demonstrate stable 
state of mind.” 

Getting encouraged by words of Lakshaman, Ram spoke, “I am greatly satisfied that you 
followed my command. I also derive peace from your sweet words. I now discard the 
sorrow and shall attain peace of mind.” 

7-53 Lakshaman to attend public call (26 / 2163) 

Ram praised Lakshaman and made him in-charge to attend public grievances. Showing 
utmost importance of royal responsibility he narrated the story of king Nrug. 

‘Nrug was a great king always maintaining austerity, truthfulness and righteousness. 
Once coming to Pushkar he offered ten million cows to Brahmins in charity. Among the 
herd of cows, one cow of a poor Brahmin was mixed up. The Brahmin was not able to 
locate his cow. One day he located his cow at another brahmin’s place. The name of the 
cow was Shabala. He called her name and the cow followed him. The other Brahmin 
who had got that cow from the king Nrug, maintained his claim over the cow. Both 
together went to the royal palace for justice. Somehow, despite their long stay, they 
couldn’t meet the king. Consequently they cursed the king, “You have taken a safe 
refuge like a chameleon, therefore, you are cursed to become a chameleon. You will 
attain your liberation from this curse during incarnation of Srikrishna. Those Brahmins 
also disclosed that just before the advent of Kaliyug, Nar and Narayan will incarnate (7- 
53-22) for the common wellbeing.’ 


Page 33 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Ram reminded Lakshaman, “The king Nrug was although truthful and religious he had to 
suffer from the curse only because there was a lapse in audience to the public 
grievances. 

7-54 Nrug suffered curse (19 / 2182) 

Lakshaman wanted to know what happened to Nrug further. Ram narrated the story 
about his life as a chameleon. 

‘On departure of the Brahmins, the king learnt about their curse. He readily accepted the 
curse and crowned his son vasu as king. Three types of ditches to suit the conditions of 
three different seasons (rain, winter and summer) round the year, were made ready. 
Seasonal fruit bearing trees were also planted around the ditches. Fragrant flowers in six 
yojan wide strip, surrounding the ditches were planted. As cursed the king was 
transformed in the form of a chameleon, and took refuge in the previously prepared 
ditches.’ 

7-55 Nimi and Vashishath cursed each other (21 / 2203) 

Ram enquired whether Lakshaman wanted to hear more stories. Getting his affirmative 
reply, Ram narrated the story of curse between Vashishth and Nimi. 

‘ Nimi was the twelfth child of Ikshvaku. He was religious and upholder of truth. Once he 
resolved to perform a long continuing ygya for five thousand years. With this intention he 
offered the chief priestly position to Vashishath. He also invited Angira and Bhrugu to 
grace the occasion. 

Before commencing the ygya, Vashishath informed the king Nimi, “ Prior to your 
invitation I had already accepted the invitation of Indr. Therefore wait until I come back.” 
In the meanwhile, Gautam initiated the role of Vashishath. When Vashishath returned he 
found the ygya initiated by Gautam. He lost the cool of his mind and wanted to see the 
king. After waiting for a couple of hours he couldn’t meet the king. During that period the 
king was sleeping. Infuriated sage Vashishath cursed the king to lose his physical form. 

When the king was awake he learnt about the curse hurled by Vashishath on him. He 
said, “I didn’t have any information about your arrival therefore I am not at fault of 
keeping you waiting. However you have cursed me under spell of wrath, I also curse you 
to lose your physical identity. 

Both lost their physical form.’ 

7-56 Mitr, Varun and Urvashi (29 / 2232) 

Having lost his physical form, invisible Vashishath arrived to Brhahma. Paying respect 
to him, he spoke, “I have lost my physical form because of Nimi’s curse." Brahma 
advised him to travel in the semen of Varun, and Mitr, and you will come out in physical 
form without getting into anybody’s womb. You will continue receiving your earlier 
honour." 


Page 34 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


During those days god Mitr had shared the duties of god Varun and both were respectful 
to gods. Urvashi, a famous celestial dancer happened to take her bath in ksheersagar. 
Seeing her charming physical form, Varun’s lust got provoked. Subsequently he asked 
Urvashi to spend some time with him. Answering his solicitation, she told him that she 
had already accepted Mitr as her passion partner. Respecting her decision Varun spoke 
to her, “ I can’t contain my charged semen, and I eject it into a pot.” Urvashi was glad 
over his decision, and then she left the place, and came to Mitr. 

Mitr was very angry over her late arrival, and cursed her to go to earth, “There is a king 
of Kashi, and his name is Pururav. He is son of Budh and he will be your husband." 
Before her arrival, Mitr had already discharged his semen in the pot where Varun had 
subsequently dropped his semen. 

Urvashi came to Prathishthanpur, near prayag and living with Pururava produced a son 
called Ayu. Subsequently Ayu was blessed with a son called Nahush, who became Indr 
for one hundred thousand years. The seat of Indr had fallen vacant because Indr was 
afflicted by the sin of killing a Brahmin (Vrutrasur). 

7-57 Vashishth revived, and lineage of Nimi (21 / 2253) 

From the semen pot of Mitr and Varun was first born Agastya. He left saying, “I am not 
son of Mitr. Later, Vashishath came out of that, and he revived his original form. He was 
accepted as family preceptor of Ikshavaku house. 

Although Nimi had no physical form but his spirit permeated the air. The ygya initiated by 
him was successfully completed on his behalf by the Brahmins and priests. Pleased by 
his interest in the ygya, Bhrugu enquired whether he had any wish. Nimi wanted, “I 
should be given a place over the eyelids. To reduce the tiredness of eye, I would cause 
momentary closing of the eyelids, which will provide relaxation to the eyes.” Bhrugu 
granted to be so. 

The body of Nimi was saved in oil tub. Taking his body, stirring exercise was conducted 
over his body. This resulted into the birth of Mithi. Because of the strange technique 
adopted he was called Janak also. Since he was an output of the body having no life, 
he was Videh. From Mithi is derived a word Maithili which means child of the house of 
Mithi. Janak videh had been used as a title of the descendants of Nimi. 

7-58 Yayati cursed (25 / 2278) 

Lakshaman was surprised over loose temper of Nimi, “He should have exercised 
restraint.” Answering his doubt Ram quoted an example of Yayati, “Very few persons 
would be like Yayati who endured the curse without any retaliatory reaction.” Saying thus 
he narrated the legend about Yayati. 

‘Yayati was son of Nahush and had earned a good reputation as a king. He had two 
wives, Sharmishtha and Devayani. The former was the daughter of a demon, while the 
latter was the daughter of Shukracharya. Sharmishth gave him a son called Puru, 


Page 35 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


whereas Devayani’s sun was known as Yadu. Yayati had more affection for 
Sharmishtha, and therefore Devayani and Yadu felt ignored and neglected. One day, 
Yadu proposed to her mother, “I can’t bear the differential treatment of the king, and 
therefore both of us should end our life. If you want to live, you can do that, but I would 
end my life alone." 

Devayani remembered his father Shukracharya, and he appeared before her. She 
narrated her pitiable condition in the house of Yayati. Hearing her agony, Shukrachaya 
went to Yayati and cursed him to lose his handsome youthful physique, and attain ugly 
old age seized with the state of inactivity.’ 

7-59 Puru and Yadu (23 / 2301) 

After Shukracharya left the place, Yayati turned into a weak and pale old person. His 
anxiety was to regain the youth again. He sent for his son Yadu and spoke to him, “My 
appearance of old age is exchangeable. May I borrow your youth?” Yadu replied him 
point blank, “You should solicit it from your beloved son Puru." 

When the king solicited the youth from Puru, he spoke, “I am fortunate to serve my 
father. Do it immediately.” Yayati regained his youth and Puru became an old and aged 
person. Living for a long life of passion and lust, the king Yayati, one day spoke to Puru, 
“I now take back my old age from you and offer back your youth to you. I also crown you 
the king.” Thus Puru became king and stayed at Prathishthanpur. 

Subsequently, Yayati cursed Yadu, “You disobeyed my command, and demonstrated 
disrespect to me. I am pained by your strange behaviour which is closer to the behaviour 
of a demon that a kshatriya. You and your descendants shall always remain deprived of 
royal share.” 

Ram concluded the story mentioning that Nimi retaliated to Vashishath whereas Yayati 
demonstrated restraint. 

While narrating such stories, the night came to an end. It was the first night when Sita 
was deserted and Lakshaman had come back after dropping her near the hermitage of 
Valmiki. 

7-59 /l 9 A dog in royal court (28 / 2329) 

Observing the regal practice, Ram occupied in the morning his seat in the royal court. 
He asked Lakshaman to personally verify whether some body was waiting with some 
grievances. 

During the reign of Ram, nobody suffered from any affliction. The trees and crops had 
adequate yield to meet the people’s requirement. Nothing was found lacking. 


9 


This sarg 7-59/1 and subsequent sarg 7-59/2 are not common in prevalent several versions of valmiki ramayan. 


Page 36 of 61 




Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Righteousness prevailed over criminal attitude. Naturally there was no grievance for the 
king. 

Finding none on the royal gate with any grievance, Lakshaman reported accordingly. He 
was again asked to recheck on the royal gate. When he came out, he found one dog 
barking on him. He asked whether he had any grievance. The dog answered in 
affirmative and mentioned to present his grievance personally to the king. Lakshaman 
went back to Ram to seek his permission to bring the dog in who was there on royal gate 
with a grievance. Coming out when Lakshaman asked him to get into the royal court he 
mentioned, “The temples, royal palaces, and the houses of brahmins are the sacred 
places where gods ( i.e., Fire, Indr, Surya and Vayu) reside. I can’t enter without 
permission of the king. You need to confirm from the king about my entry.” 

7-59/2 The grievance of the dog (52 / 2481) 

Appearing before Ram, the dog mentioned, “The king is the protector of the citizens. 
Dharm (righteousness) means to uphold 10 the welfare of others (7-59/2- 7). Since a king 
is pledged to uphold the welfare of others, he is the manifestation of dharm." 

Continuing further he lodged his complain, “One mendicant Brahmin named 
Sarvarthsidh had caused injury to my head. I am sure I hadn’t caused any harm to him.” 

Ram immediately summoned the Brahmin. When he appeared in the royal court, he was 
asked to explain his misbehaviour to the dog. The Brahmin mentioned, “I was hungry, 
and in course of my soliciting food at the dwelling houses, the dog time and again stood 
on mid of the road. I advised him to take a side, but he didn’t pay heed to my words. 
Getting angry, I hit his head with my rod. I am a culprit, and I am ready to accept the 
decree of the king." 

Ram sought the advice of the sages (Vashishath, Angira, Kashyap and others) for 
pronouncing appropriate punishment to the Brahmin. The sages mentioned, “A Brahmin 
is immune to any physical punishment.” 

In the meanwhile, the dog interfered and advised to make the Brahmin as the sole in- 
charge of a religious inn ( math tc). Ram liked his idea. Soon an elephant was brought 
and the Brahmin mounted on the elephant was sent as master of the inn at Kalanjar. 

When others expressed their surprise whether it was a punishment or boon, Ram asked 
the dog to explain the mystery behind such a strange punitive measure. The dog 
narrated his autobiography, “In my previous birth I was also the master of the same inn 
of Kalanjar. I had taken extreme precaution to keep the visitors and inhabitants of the inn 
satisfied. Whatever gifts were received at the inn, they were duly distributed among the 
needy people. The result is evident, I became a dog in the subsequent birth.” 


10 struts; 


Page 37 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-60 Chyavan met Ram (18 / 2499) 

The advent of spring season had made the nights pleasant. Ram regularly attended the 
royal duties and maintained the happiness among the citizens. 

Once, sage Chayavan arrived leading hundreds of other saints from the bank of river 
Yamuna. While meeting Ram they offered in gift pots of holy water of sacred places and 
lots of fruits. 

Extending warm welcome to them, Ram enquired about their any specific purpose of 
visiting Ayodhya, and pledged to fulfil them immediately. The sages were glad with the 
warm treatment and his assurances. 

7-61 Atrocities of Lavanasur (24 / 2523) 

As desired by Ram, the sage Chyavan narrated the cause of their coming to Ayodhya. 

He mentioned, “We are being harassed by a demon called Lavanasur. His father is 
Madhu who is a great soul and used to respect the sages and gods. Performing a 
persevering penance, Madhu pleased Shankar. Shankar produced a trident similar to 
the one he holds in his hand. Gifting it to Madhu he warned him not to use it 
indiscriminately over gods and Brahmins otherwise that would return back to him. The 
trident is a potent weapon, capable of razing the opponents to ground. Madhu sought its 
continuance to his succeeding lineage also. Shankar rejected his demand, but as he 
was pleased over him, consented the continuance of the trident to his immediate son 
only.” 

Narrating the storey further, the sage said, “The son of Madhu, is impudent and a rogue. 
He often harasses the saints and Brahmins disturbing their sacrificial performances in 
fire. Madhu also warned him to mend his ways but he didn’t pay attention to his words. 
Disgusted with his nature, Madhu had withdrawn to ocean handing over the trident to his 
son Lavanasur. He has made him aware about the limitation of the trident." 

Chayvan passionately sought Ram’s interference, “Our appeals to several kings have 
been so far futile. We have heard about your bravery in Lanka, and therefore have come 
to you for help.” 

7-62 Shatrughn to face Lavanasur (21 / 2544) 

When Ram sought more details about the life style of Lavanasur, the sage spoke to him, 
“He is carnivorous. Mostly saints fall in his trap." 

Ram making a firm commitment for his elimination, sought the help from his brothers, 
“Who between Bharat and Shatrughn would help me in this regard?” Although Bharat 
readily gave his consent to tackle the demon, Shatrughn put his claim forcefully, “Bharat 
had been fortunate to serve your cause for pretty long time. This service should be in my 
share.” 


Page 38 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Ram agreed to Shatrughan’s offer, and spoke to him, “You have to accept my command 
without expressing any rhyme or reason. I would crown you today the king of the country 
in possession of Madhu. Thereafter, you will take appropriate steps to eliminate 
Lavanasur.” 

7-63 Shatrughn’s coronation (31 / 2575) 

Hearing Ram’s command for his coronation, Shatrughn softly submitted, “Scriptures 
prohibit the crowning of the youngest in presence of the elders. I realise my fault for 
interfering Bharat’s pledge to kill the demon. Most respectfully, I am ready to obey your 
command, and I won’t mention anything more, for I am afraid, I may commit another 
mistake as I did by interfering Bharat." 

On the command of Ram all auspicious items were gathered. Subsequently, he 
performed the coronation of Shatrughn as a king. He gifted one infallible arrow to 
Shatrughn, “This arrow belongs to Vishnu, who had used this to kill Madhu and Kaitabh. 
I didn’t use this to kill Ravan for fear of loss of several other innocent lives. Now you 
have to use this arrow against Lavanasur.” 

Ram also deliberated on the strategy how to kill Lavanasur, “He worships the Shankar’s 
trident, and does not carry it always with himself. Whenever the situation arises, he picks 
it up from home, and uses to his opponents. You have to find out when he is out of the 
city without trident. When he comes back, keep barricading his entry to the city, and 
throw challenge to him to pick up the fight before getting possession of the trident. That 
is the opportune time to kill him.” 

7-64 Forces dispatched (18 / 2593) 

Ram asked Shatrughn to dispatch the forces in advance so that they cross ganga by 
end of summer. The appropriate time for attack over Lavansur is rainy season. 
Accordingly, Shatrughn dispatched for thousand cavalry, two thousand chariots, one 
hundred elephants and other support services to keep the army fully spirited. As advised 
by Ram, he also carried one million gold coins to feed the army (7-64-4). He directed the 
chiefs of the forces to camp after crossing ganga on its other bank. 

The army was sent in advance, and Shatrughn left Ayodhya after one month of their 
departure. While departing he offered respectful salutation to mother kausalya, Sumitra, 
and Kikeyi. Thereafter bowing to the feet of guru Vashishath, and his elder brothers 
Lakshaman, and Bharat, he came to Ram. Offering his respect on his feet, he made his 
auspicious round, and moved out alone. 

7-65 Shatrughn at Valmiki’s hermitage (39 / 2632) 

Spending two nights on way, third day Shatrughn arrived at the hermitage of Valmiki. 
Paying his respect to the feet of the sage, he introduced himself as brother of Ram, and 
sought his permission to stay for one night. Extending warm welcome to him, the sage 
offered him fruits, arghya etc and spoke, “This place is free for the family members of the 


Page 39 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


house of Ikshavaku. You are most welcome.” Satisfied with roots and fruits, he spent 
some time in the cottage of Valmiki. 

Subsequently Shatrughn saw huge relic of grand ygya performed around that place. He 
enquired from the sage about that ygya. To answer his query, Valmiki narrated the story: 

Sudas was an illustrious king of your family. His son Mitrasah foms guru variously 
called Virsah and Saudas %ft was a brave child. Once he was on his hunting 

mission in the forest. He noticed two demons disguised as tigers killing deer. They killed 
all the deer of the forest. The child Mitrasah was upset with their misdeeds. He killed one 
of them at the site. The other demon, in great anguish, threatened Mitrasah for avenging 
the killing of his friend. Saying thus the demon disappeared. 

Subsequently Mitrasah became king. Later, he organised a ygya chaired by the sage 
Vashishath. The ygya lasted for several years. When the final day of completion of the 
ygya arrived, the demon recalling his past revenge with the king came to him in the 
disguise of Vashishath. He asked, “Without any query, serve me today meat for my 
food." The king advised the cook, but they were puzzled. In the meanwhile the demon 
disguised as the cook prepared the meat of a human being. The king accompanied by 
his wife Madyanti, served the food to the sage. Realising to be meat, Vashishath burst to 
the brim, “The food you have served me shall be your regular food (which meant he was 
cursed to become a demon). The king, in retaliation, held the holy water in his palm to 
curse his guru, but his wife prevented him in doing so. Subsequently he dropped that 
charged water over his own feet which turned the complexion of his feet to piebald black. 
Since that day he got his another name, Kalamashpad 

The sage grew compassionate on him and pronounced a boon, “This curse will not last 
longer than twelve years. Thereafter you will lose your old memory, and regain your 
crown.” 

Hearing the legend of the king Shatrughn retired for the night. 

7-66 Sita gave birth to two sons (17 / 2649) 

It was midnight, Valmiki was awakened by the young boys, “Sita has given birth to a 
twin." The sage happily entered the cottage where Sita was staying. Seeing two male 
babies, Valmiki invoked holy mantr meant to ensure safety of the nascent children 
against ghosts and evil creatures. He gave two separate bunch of kush charged with 
safety mantr to the elderly women to use them as auspicious tool to drive out evils from 
the cottage. He named the elder one as Kush, and the younger one as Lav. 

Shatrughn also heard at night the names of Sita and Ram being chanted frequently 
along with holy mantr. Having come to know about the birth of a twin, he entered Sita’s 


Page 40 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


cottage and mentioned, “It is very auspicious moment.” He was so much overjoyed that 
he couldn’t realise passing of the night of savan 11 (7-66-13) month so fast." 

Getting up in the morning, Shatrughn performed his routine worship and moved 
westward. It took him seven nights to arrive at the Yamuna bank ashram of the sage 
Chyavan. Hearing holy legends, he spent pleasant time in the association of the sages. 

7-67 King Mandhata (26 / 2675) 

Shaturghn enjoyed the legends narrated by the sage Chayavan. During discourses of 
one night, he enquired about the valour of Lavanasur and the potency of his trident. He 
also wanted to know who had so far been killed by him. As a sample case the sage 
narrated the story of the king Mandhata. 

In the lineage of Ikshavaku there was a king named Mandhata who was son of 
Yuvnashva. Mandhata was known for his gallantry performances. Having almost won 
the kings of the earth he attacked over heavens to grab at least half of the kingdom of 
Indr. The chief of gods Indr questioned Mandhata, “Did you subjugate all the terrestrial 
kings?” Mandhata was proud of his performances, but Indr doubted whether Lavanasur, 
son of Madhu could listen to his commands. 

Picking up Indr’s reference, Mandhata came back and sent a messenger to Lavanasur 
seeking his earliest surrender to him. Instead of getting afraid of his message, the 
demon devoured the messenger alive. Not seeing the return of the messenger, 
Mandhata attacked over Lavanasur with his army. The demon came out to counter the 
attack, and he hurled his radiant trident over the attacking army. After burning to ashes 
Mandhata and his entire army, the trident got back to the demon. 

Concluding the story, the sage advised Shatrughn, “In the morning he goes out for 
collecting meat. While coming back, and before he enters the palace, you should 
intervene and kill him swiftly." 

7-68 Shatrughn tracked Lavanasur (20 / 2695) 

In the morning, Lavanasur came out of the city of Madhupuri to gather meat for his day’s 
food. Shatrughn, in the mean time took control of the entry gate awaiting his return. In 
the afternoon the demon returned carrying thousands of dead bodies over his shoulders. 
When he saw Shatrughn standing on the entry gate he threatened him, “Your bow and 
arrow will not work. You will soon join those thousands of beings who have met their end 
here. I would comeback soon with my weapon.” 

Saying thus when he wanted to move forward towards his palace, Shatrughn obstructed 
his movement and sadi, “Only a fool can spare the enemy from his trap. Now forget 


Kush and Lav were born in the month of savan flfcR of the rainy season. 


Page 41 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


about your weapon, come and fight with me. I am Shatrughn, son of Dasarath and 
borther of Ram.” 

Lavan spoke to him, “Good that you came to me. I had heard about Ram who had killed 
Ravan for a woman. Ravan was brother of my maternal aunt Surpanakha. That time I 
spared your brother by not joining the fight but today you will not go back alive.” 

7-69 Lavanasur killed (40 / 2735) 

When challenged by Shatrughn, the demon uprooted several trees and hurled them over 
Shatrughn. Those trees were countered by his arrows. The shafts of Shatrughn caused 
numerous injuries over the demon’s body. Subsequently, the demon, finding a chance, 
hurled again one massive tree over him, and he fell unconscious over the ground. This 
caused great anxiety to the gods watching the encounter from sky. The demon taking 
him dead, didn’t care to bring his trident. 

While he was busy picking up the corpses he had brought from forest, Shatrughn 
recovered and again took over the command. The wave of joy prevailed among gods. 
This time, Shatrughn loaded the ultimate shaft gifted by Ram. Having looked over the 
brilliant shaft over the string, the gods were panicked. They approached Brahma and 
arpprised him about unusual shaft in the possession of Shatrughn. Brahma calmed them 
down, “It is the shaft of Vishnu created earlier to eliminate two dreadful demons Madhu 
and Kaitabh. There should be no panic.” 

Finally, Shatrughn shot the shaft over Lavanasur. Striking over the chest of the demon, it 
sapped his life, and went deep into the earth. Subsequently it came back to Shatrughn. 
The sages and gods rejoiced the killing of the dreadful demon. The trident lying in the 
palace, deserted Madhupuri, and went back flying to god Shankar. 

7-70 Madhupuri rehabilitated (17 / 2752) 

Gland gods appeared before Shatrughn and enquired whether he had any wish. 
Shatrughn expressed his desire to rehabilitate the city again. Gods blessed him to be so 
and departed to their celestial abode. 

Shatrughn commanded the army camped at ganga bank to come to Madhupuri. 
Commencing from the month of savan (7-70-8 19 ) it took twelve years in rehabilitating 
the city. It was situated along the crescent course of the river Yamuna. Varieties of 
commercial houses along with large mansions enhanced the dynamism in the city of 
Madhupuri. Natural scene created from the varieties of fruit and flower bearing trees was 
the special feature of the city. 

7-71 Shatrughn on return journey to Ayodhya (24 / 2776) 

Shatrughn was excited to meet Ram. Leaving major army for the safety of Madhupuri, 
he left for Ayodhya escorted by a small contingent of one hundred chariots. Staying at 
seven eight places on way he arrived at the hermitage of Valmiki. Greeted warmly by 


Page 42 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Valmiki he spent his night there. Valmiki blessed him, “When you killed Lavana I was 
with Indr in heaven. I was impressed to watch your fight with the demon. The killing of 
the demon has removed the pall of fear from the transYamuna area.” 

As a token of affection, Valmiki smelled his head. After taking food, Shatrughn listened 
to the song depicting the biography and pastime of Ram. The text of the song was 
composed in lucid Sanskrit. The accompanying music of violin was so captivating as if 
each event appeared to take place before the eyes. Entire army accompanying 
Shatrughn was thrilled to listen to the songful glory of Ram, and they submitted to 
Shatrughn, “Enquire about this melodious and heart sweetening program.” Shatrughn 
spoke to them, “Such things keep on happening here at this ashram of Valmiki, and 
therefore it is not proper to enquire from him.” Later he entered his cottage to retire. 

7-72 Shatrughn met Ram (21 / 2797) 

For quite some time at night, Shatrughn didn’t sleep, and continued enjoying the notes 
on violin coming straight to his cottage. Next morning, after waking up, he performed his 
daily ritual and met the sage. Offering his respect over his feet, sought his permission to 
depart to Ayodhya. 

He was excited to meet Ram, and therefore, arriving at Ayodhya, he went straight to see 
Ram. Saluting over his feet, he spoke to him, “As commanded by you the demon had 
been eliminated. Twelve years have rolled out settling the city and I was excited to have 
your darshan (asfa holy glimpse).” 

Embracing him, Ram spoke encouraging words, “You have indeed performed the tough 
task. For a kshatariya staying outside should not be taken with frustration and nostalgia 
of home coming. After a week you should be back to your city. The service to keep the 
citizens happy is of utmost importance to a king.” 

Shatrughn accepted his command readily. After staying for a week he left for Madhupuri. 
He was seen off by Bharat and Lakshaman who came escorting him to his chariot. 

7-73 A wailing Brahmin (19 / 2816) 

Premature death was unheard in the reign of Ram, but an old Brahmin came wailing at 
the royal gate. He was carrying the dead body of his lone son. He mentioned, “I haven’t 
committed any sin, nor did I hurt anybody. The untimely death of my son is indicative of 
the sin of the king. It is said due to sin of the king, the citizens have to suffer. If my child 
doesn’t revive I along with my wife would end our lives here on the royal gate.’ 

7-74 Narada identified the cause (33 / 2849) 

Immediately the royal court was held. Arrival and presence of eight eminent sages 
(Markandeya, Maudgalya, Vamdev, Kashyap, Katyayan, Jabali, Gautam and Narad) 
marked the proceedings of the deliberations. Ram sought their advice on the cause of 
untimely death of the brahmin’s child. Pondering over the anxiety of Ram, Narad spoke, 


Page 43 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


“During satyug only Brahmins resorted to tapasya (penance for spiritual enhancement 
and overall well being), and that caused the presence of dharm with four quarters over 
earth. In tretayug, kshatriya enhanced their strength, and they attained higher status 
equivalent to Brahmins. Manu initiated chaturvarnya four categories of people’s 

class) and enjoined their social as well as individual duties and responsibilities. 
According to this, in tretayug only kshatriya have been allowed to undertake penance. 
This relaxation was done at the cost of loss of one quarter of dharm from earth. In the 
coming dwapar yug further relaxation to vaishya for performing penance would cause 
loss of one more quarter of dharm which means dharm would stay with only two quarters 
on earth. In kaliyug, shudr shall also be allowed to undertake penance, and thus three 
quarters of dharm shall disappear from earth.” 

Deliberating further, Narad mentioned, “One sixth (7-74-31) of the benefits of 
auspiciousness from the people’s dharm and penance, automatically accrue in the 
account of the king. Therefore the king is responsible to protect the citizens. At present, 
due to prevalence of tretayug only khsatriy are allowed to undertake penance and 
sacrifices. The death of the brahmin’s child appears to have been caused by the 
penance being performed by the other category of people who are not enjoined by the 
scriptures. Therefore it is necessary to detect and stop the incidence of undertaking such 
efforts by the unauthorised category of people.” 

7-75 Ram on detection mission (19 / 2868) 

Responding to Narad’s command, Ram advised Lakshaman, “Keep the dead body of 
the brahmin’s child anointed with herbs in oil tub lest it decayed. Assure the old Brahmin 
for our due service to him.” 

Subsequently he made a mental call to pushpak, and that appeared instantly. Deputing 
Lakshaman and Bharat on duty of providing protection to citizens, he boarded pushpak 
equipped with bow, arrows and a sword. First he moved in the west. Finding everything 
in order, he went to the north, and couldn’t detect any lapse there also. Similarly his visit 
of the east was also without any blemish. When he arrived in the south, he found a 
person conducting a tough penance. The location was near a lake situated on the 
northern side of the shaival mountaion. The practitioner stayed perched over a tree with 
head hanging down freely. 

Ram paused and enquired from him, “What is your objective of undertaking such a 
penance? How long have you been engaged in such a performance? What is your varn 
(cpfcr social category of classification)?” 

7-76 Shambuk killed (51 / 2919) 

Ram learnt from the man on penance, “I am a shudr, and my name is Shambuk. I intend 
to bodily go to heaven.” Hearing about his tough resolve, and varn of Shudr, Ram pulling 
out the sword cut off his head. Gods appeared and appreciated his effort of eliminating 
this person who wanted to rise to the heaven in his physical from. This could have 


Page 44 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


spoiled the natural law of death after birth. Thereafter gods enquired from Ram whether 
he had any wish. Ram solicited the revival of the dead child of the Brahmin. Gods 
confirmed, “The child is already alive and has joined his family." 

Gods further informed Ram about the penance of Agastya, “He had undertaken tough 
penance for twelve years immersed in water. Today he has concluded it. We are going 
to extend our greetings to him for such a great performance. You may also come to see 
him.” 

As advised, Ram also moved to the hermitage of Agastya. Before Ram arrived there, 
gods had left being duly greeted by Agastya. When Ram landed, he offered his respects 
to the sage Agastya. The sage also reciprocated by greeting Ram with great affection 
and respect. He appreciated his effort of killing unrighteous and ambitious shudr and 
consequently reviving the brahmin’s child. 

The sage advised Ram to spend his night with him, and mentioned, “You are all in all, 
supreme among gods, and eternal entity, Srimannarain." 

Note: The shlok 7-76-29 is the statement of the accomplished sage Agastya confirming the 

supreme entity of Ram as Narayan Himself. Therefore the common concept of taking Valmiki 

depicting Ram as a model person should be taken in a correct perspective of his inherent divinity. 

^f -ttwis ^ Tft'fezrn i ggs wecFiT wft 

Subsequently the sage offered a divine jewel to Ram mentioning, “It is made by 
viswakarma.” 

Before receiving the divine jewel, Ram enquired from the sage, “Brahmins are also said 
be restricted from accepting the gifts. Being a kshatriya how can I accept the gift coming 
from the hand of a Brahmin?" 

To satisfy his anxiety, Agastya narrated a story. 

Long back in the primitive past there was no king. Brahma installed Indr as the king of 
gods. The terrestrial beings gathering at Brahma’s place requested him to appoint a king 
to them also. Brahma sent for all the gods and asked them to share one part of their 
brilliance to depute a king over earth. At that time Brahma sneezed and there came out 
a person called Kshapu. Brahma invoked all the shared brilliance of the gods over 
Kshapu and deputed him as the king over the earth. 

Kshapu ruled the earth with the brilliance of Indr. He protected the physical body of the 
citizens with the brilliance of Varun. The treasury was maintained due to the brilliance of 
kuber, and he passed decree of reward or punishment from the constituent of Yam. 

Agastya concluded, “You are also a king, and is impregnated with the brilliance of all the 
gods. For my wellbeing, from the part of Indr, accept my gift.” 


Page 45 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Ram accepted the gift happily and enquired further from the sage, “How did you receive 
this jewel, and who had earlier made it?” 

7-77 A celestial person eating a corpse (21 / 2940) 

Agastya narrated a story. 

‘In early part of tretayug, I had been in look out of a proper forest for my penance and 
meditation. My wandering brought me to a forest devoid of any animal and bird, but the 
trees were full of delicious fruits and roots. The forest was spread over length and width 
of one hundred yojan. In the centre of the forest there was a lake in the extant of one 
yojan. The lake had crystal clear water full with floating lotus. The bed of the lake was 
mud free, and water was sweet and palatable. Chirping birds of varieties of species 
enhanced the grandeur of the lake. 

There was a lonely but charming hermitage. I spent a night of the summer month of 
jyesth in that hermitage. Next morning when I moved towards the lake, I saw a dead 
body of a healthy and charming person lying near the lake. 

When I waited along the water edge of the lake, an aerial chariot landed near the dead 
body. The chariot had celestial dancers and sweet music and songs were heard. A 
person having charming personality came out of the chariot and moved towards the 
corpse. The man ate the corpse and drank water from the lake to his fill. When he was 
about to board the chariot, I asked him, “Who are you? Why do you undertake such a 
contemptible act of eating a corpse?” 

7-78 Importance of a gift (29 / 2969) 

The celestial person recited his autobiography. 

There was a king of Vidarbha, named Sudesh. He had two wives and each gave him a 
son called Shwet and Surath. I am Shwet, and when my father died, I was made the 
king. I executed my responsibility diligently for long. Once, through some source I came 
to know about precise date of my death. Handing over the kingdom to my brother, 
Surath I came to this forest for mediation. My mediation continued for three thousand 
years, and ultimately upon my death I reached Brahmalok. While I was there I had a 
feeling of intense thirst and hunger. I enquired from Brahma, “In Brahmalok nobody 
should be afflicted from thirst and hunger, but contrarily I am the one who suffer from 
such affliction.” 

Brahma asked me to visit daily this forest, and eat my own corpse. Every day I am doing 
this hateful deed. Brahma explained, “You have performed splendid austerity in penance 
but there is no evidence of a charity in your record. If you could have given gifts to others 
you could have never felt such affliction here in Brahmalok. Now there is no option, until 
you meet the sage Agastya. He would liberate you from your affliction.” 


Page 46 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


To satisfy my hunger every day I am coming here and eating my own dead body. Due to 
auspicious penance the body has become eternal, and never decays and recovers soon 
to its original form when I am finished with my eating. 

I know you are Agastya, otherwise nobody else could have entered this dreadful forest. 
Kindly accept my gift of this precious jewel. It is capable of generating items on demand. 

Agastaya resumed his story with Ram, “To liberate the king Shwet from his afflictions, I 
accepted his liberal charity. The moment I accepted his gift, the dead body disappeared. 
The king Shwet happily departed to Brahmlok. This is the same jewel which I had 
received from him.” 

7-79 Reign of the king Dand (20 / 2989) 

Ram was curious to know about the reason for that forest (where Shwet had mediated) 
being desolated and devoid of living beings. Agastya narrated another story. 

‘In satyug Manu ruled for a long time. Subsequently he handed over the rule in the 
hands of his able son Ikshavaku. Manu dropped enough guidelines of rule and cautioned 
Ikshavaku to use punishment diligently, “Sparing the punishment spoils the reign. 
Properly delivered punishment against a crime or fault earns the king his worthiness.” 

Later, Ikshavaku was blessed with one hundred sons, and the youngest remained 
illiterate and fool. He did never care about the wellbeing of his elder brothers. Ikshavaku 
made him the king of the zone falling from south of vindhya to north of shaival. His name 
was Dand, and he appointing Shukracharya as his mentor. He established his capital at 
a place whom he called Madhumant. Gradually the people of his state emerged strong 
and healthy.’ 

7-80 Dand raped the daughter of Shukracharya (18 / 3007) 

Continuing the story further Agastya mentioned. 

Once during the month of chaltr (one of the spring months) the king Dand arrived at 
the hermitage of his mentor Shukracharya. Having a glance of his daughter he became 
wild with lust. Getting close to her he solicited her association. The damsel replied, “I am 
Araja, elder daughter of Shukracharya, your guru. You should observe the rule of 
conduct, and should not behave like this with me. Anyhow, if you so much like me, seek 
my hands from my father. I understand he would not disappoint you.” 

The king Dand’s stupidity didn’t spare him, and he raped Araja. The king left, but Araja 
continued wailing awaiting the arrival of her father. 

7-81 Dand cursed (22 / 3029) 

Agastya continued with the consequences of immoral and condemnable act of the king. 


Page 47 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Some of the disciples of Shukracharya informed him the incident at his ashram. 
Although he was hungry he rushed to his daughter. His anger was amplified by his 
hunger, and he pronounced curse over king, “For seven nights the state of Dand spread 
over one hundred yojan will suffer from the dust laden storm. Dand and his entire family 
will be eliminated. All the wild animals would desert this area. The area of one yojan 
around my ashram shall maintain the reserve of animals and birds around the big water 
lake.” 

Speaking to his daughter, Araja, he mentioned, “You will remain here alive, but we will 
all quit this place. The living beings staying with you here shall also remain alive. A time 
will come when you will attain your liberation.” Araja accepted his command and stayed 
there. 

The dust laden storm commenced and in seven nights the area was turned desolated. 
The king Dand with his family died. 

Agastya concluded the story, “Subsequently this area became famous as Dandakaranya 
<s |J 3cbK'Jii (7-81-19). When the sages later came and stayed here, it has been known as 
Janasthan : TT rs TFr (7-81-20).” 

Agastya indicated to Ram about the time for sandhya as the day had come to its end. 

7-82 Ram back to Ayodhya (20 / 3059) 

In the evening time Ram performed his normal worship. Later he ate fruits and roots 
before he retired for night. Next morning, after following his usual ritual, sought 
permission of the sage to leave for Ayodhya. The sages of the ashram arranged a 
heartfelt farewell. When he offered his departing obeisance to Agastya, he reciprocated 
with same warmth and invited him to visit the ashram again. 

When Ram landed at the central entry to royal palace in Ayodhya, he released pushpak 
for its celestial parking. Moving towards his palace, he sent for Lakshaman and Bharat. 

7-83 Bharat’s view on rajsuya ygya (20/3079) 

Meeting his brothers by embracing them, Ram spoke, “Fortunately, the issue of 
brahmin’s child has been solved successfully. To enhance the glory of the kingdom, I 
intend to organise rajsuya ygya T \Wjd q^T." 

Counting the beneficiaries of the ygya in the past, Ram mentioned, “ Mitra , performed 
this ygya and his enemies were eliminated. Subsequently he got the status of Varun. 
Som on its performance attained eternity of his status.” 

Submitting his view Bharat spoke, “You are refuge of all the beings of the earth. The 
kings look to you as a hallmark of conduct. By performing rajsuya enemies are 
eliminated. This means the ygya is fraught with violence. In my view you should not 
perform any ritual which hurts any being of this earth.” 


Page 48 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Ram praised Bharat for his excellent advice. 

7-84 Lakshaman pleaded for ashvamedh 3 TTFT 4 ygya (18 / 3097) 

Lakshaman submitted, “The performance of ashvamedh is learnt to auger all 
auspiciousness. When Indr was afflicted of killing Vrutrasur ^TTy, a Brahmin, he was 
relieved of his sin by performing this ygya.” 

To elaborate his view, Lakshaman narrated the full story. 

‘Long time ago, when gods and demons had friendly terms, there was a great demon 
named Vrutr y . He had a strange body, one yojan wide and three yojan high. He was 
widely respected by all beings since he loved them affectionately. He was fully aware of 
righteousness; with his steadfast mind, he was grateful to others. During his reign the 
trees bore delicious fruits. There was enough yield of crops without tilling the land. Once 
it occurred to him that he should undertake penance for that is the only tool to secure 
eternal bliss, and all others are transitory in nature. 

Anointing his son Madhureshwar as king he undertook the penance. Indr got afraid of his 
initiative and went to lord Vishnu and spoke to him, “Taking deep affection in you 12 the 
demon Vrutr had become so powerful (7-84-15). Now with the completion of his penance 
he would be our eternal master, and all gods shall stand in his service. You had helped 
us earlier, and now some mechanism should be developed for his end.’ 

7-85 Vrutr fT killed (22 / 3119) 

Ram advised Lakshaman to complete the story. Accordingly, Lakshaman continued 
narrating the balance part of the story. 

Lord Vishnu spoke to Indra, “Before your appeal I have already established an 
affectionate relation 13 with Vrutr, and therefore I can’t initiate his killing. You have to 
make efforts and I can share my potency in three ways: (i) with Indr, (ii) with his bolt, and 
(iii) with earth.” 

Thus encouraged by Vishnu, gods and Indr came to the place where Vrutr was engaged 
in penance. Aura coming out of his body was so impressive that gods were not able to 
decide what to do. In the meantime Indr dashed his bolt over Vrutr who was immersed in 
his penance. Vrutr died, but impressed by his innocence, Indr strongly felt guilty minded. 
Finally he withdrew in the dark zone beyond the mountains. Gods were overjoyed on 
Vrut’s end, but were sad about Indr who had disappeared mysteriously. 


12 3TT fit TlfciTTHi ^PTT f^TT WFT I rfn^jfrf Hlcbui I I 7-84-15 

13 tp %TT3TjfAT WPFTS 7-85-04 


Page 49 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Gods approached Vishnu and submitted, “You have been instrumental in the killing of 
Vrutr, but Indr has been afflicted with the sin of killing a Brahmin. Now you can clear his 
blemish.” Hearing gods, Vishnu advised, “Indr is required to organise ashvamedh ygya 
and worship my ygya form. That would only deliver his liberation from the sin. Finally, he 
would be resumed to his position of chief of gods." 

7-86 Asvamedh liberated Indr (21 / 3140) 

Lakshaman continued the story. 

‘With the initiative of gods, Bruhaspati went to the place where Indr had lied down 
afflicted by the sin. Keeping Indr in forefront, he conducted the asvamedh ygya. When 
the ygya was to be concluded, the sin deserted Indr, and asked for her place. She 
divided herself into four parts and sought four places of stay who can share the sin. (i) 
first quarter in water during rainy season, (ii) second quarter in earth, (iii) third quarter in 
women during menstruation period, (iv) last quarter afflicting killer of righteous Brahmins. 
Finally Indr resumed his responsibility as chief of gods. 

Emphasising the importance of asvamedh ygya, Lakshaman submitted to Ram, 
“asvamedh ygya is worthy of ensuring all auspiciousness, and therefore, steps may be 
taken to initiate its performance." 

7-87 lla M : male and female (29 / 3169) 

Ram also narrated one story to illustrate the significance of asvamedh ygya. 

In early days lla was son of Kardam and he was king of Bahlik. He used to protect the 
citizens as his own children. Once during chaitr month he went for hunting in a forest. He 
killed scores of dreadful animals. Moving along with his attendants he happened to pass 
through a forest where Skand (the chief of gods army) was born. That was the 
entertainment place of Shiv with his divine consort Parvati. In that forest nobody is in 
masculine form. Everybody including Shiv was in feminine form. 

The king also along with his entourage was transformed into feminine form. He was 
upset with this development. He could immediately realise that Shiv could be of help. 
Chanting his glory he pleased Shiv who asked him for the boon except the 
transformation into male. As a result, the frustrated king didn’t solicit any blessing, and 
passionately prayed goddess Parvati. She grew compassionate on him, and mentioned, 
“Your solicitation is to regain your male form. In this regard, I have limitation of granting 
you only half boon, the rest is in the jurisdiction of lord Shiv. Thus, I can grant you to 
become male for half life only. You have to decide the sequence of period yourself.” 

lla preferred the monthly cycle of alternating between male and female. He was also 
assured, “When you are male in a given month you won’t be able to remember anything 
of your previous one month as a female. So shall be the case in the succeeding female 
month, all memory of male month shall stand erased.” 


Page 50 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-88 llaa met Budh (24 / 3193) 

llaa was already transformed in a charming woman and she preferred to retain the same 
form in the first month. Her attendants who had also become women, moved with her. 
Leaving behind their chariots and horses, they traversed enjoying the natural scene 
around. Subsequently they reached a lake, and saw a man immersed deep in water. He 
was engaged in meditation. 

The lake was out of the restricted zone of Shiv and Parvati. The man was Budh. llaa 
also entered the lake water and enjoyed the cool bath. While she was in water, Budha 
could see her and was passionately attracted by her beauty. Coming out of lake, Budha 
came to his ashram and called those women attendants. He enquired about her from 
them. They replied, “She is our master and she is still single.” 

Budh invoked his celestial skill called aavartaani vidya, and could come to know all 
about the king lla. He advised those attendants to occupy the nearby mountains where 
enough fruits and roots were available and called them kimpurshi ( kinnari , i.e., woman 
kinnar). He assured them, “subsequently you will meet your match here.” 

7-89 llaa gave birth to Pururava (25 / 3218) 

Bharat and Lakshaman were surprised to know about the genesis of kimpurushi, and 
were excited to learn what happened to llaa thereafter. Ram continued the story. 

‘When those attendants were gone, Budh spoke to llaa, “I am Budh, son of Som god. 
You may take me your well wisher soliciting your affection.” She replied, “I am free, and 
alone roaming around here. We may stay together comfortably, and I am at your 
disposal.” Thereafter Budh and llaa enjoyed the conjugal pleasure for the period of a 
month. Thus the month of vaishak was over, and llaa was transformed to a male form. 

When lla woke up on his bed in the morning of the first day of the next month, he saw 
Budh performing penance in lake water. He enquired from Budh, “Where is my horde of 
attendants? I had been here with them.” lla had lost the residual memory of previous 
month as a woman. Budh spoke, “Those attendants have been killed in a heavy hail 
storm. Scared by the storm, you saved your life in this ashram." 

The king lla further mentioned, “My attendants are dead, but I have to go back to my 
kingdom. I can’t stay here longer now. My eldest son Shashbindu is very capable prince, 
and I have to perform his coronation. I have also to look after the interest of the citizens 
of my kingdom.” 

Impressing upon him, Budh spoke in sweet words, “O, King! After your stay of one year, 

I would able to extend any help to you.” 

lla stayed there for one year. Every alternate month when he was in woman form, Budh 
used to enjoy the conjugal relation. Subsequently in the ninth month, a brilliant son was 


Page 51 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


born from llaa, who was later called Pururava. Immediately after the birth, the child 
attainend the age to be initiated to ygyopaveet samskar (sacred thread). 

During the male months, the king lla used to undertake religious exercises of meditation 
and listening to legends from Budh. 

7-90 Asvamedh ygya helped lla (24 / 3242) 

Ram continued the story further which confirmed the benefits of asvamedth ygya. 

‘It was the last month of the year when Budh had started living with lla, and it was a male 
month. Budh invited the sages Samvart, Chyavan, Arishtnemi, Pramodan, Modakar, and 
Durvasa. They together began pondering over a way out for liberation of the king lla 
from the cycle of male and female. In the meanwhile, Kardam, father of lla, also arrived 
there accompanied by Pulastya, Kratu, Vashatkar, and Onkar. Discussing among 
themselves over various way outs, Kardam proposed, “God Shankar would only be able 
to liberate lla. Therefore, asvamedha ygya should be performed keeping Shankar 
keeping as main deity.” 

Other sages also consented to the proposal of Kardam. The ygya was commenced near 
the ashram of Budh, under the stewardship of Marutt, a disciple of Samvart. On the 
conclusion of the ygya Shankar appeared and enquired, “I am happy with the 
performance of this ygya. What can I do for lla, the king of Bahlik?” The sages prayed 
him to liberate lla from the cycle of womanship. He granted to be so, and disappeared. 
The sages also dispersed happily. 

Later, lla offered the kingdom of Bahlik to his son Shashbindu, and established a new 
kingdom in the central zone (on the confluence of ganga and yamuna) which was called 
Pratishthanpur. Subsequently Pururava became the king of the state of Pratishthanpur 
established earlier by lla.’ 

Concludig the story, Ram emphasised the significance of asvamedh ygya which 
liberated lla from the life of womanship. 

7-91 Preparations for asvamedh (29 / 3271) 

Having deliberated with Bharat and Lakshaman, finally Ram gave his consent for the 
performance of asvamedh ygya. The proposal received the blessings of Vashishath, 
Vamdev, Jabali, Kashyap and others. The venue of the ygya was determined to be at 
Naimisharnya on the bank of Comati. 

Accordingly Ram advised Lakshaman to invite Sugriv, Vibhishan and other vassal kings 
with the horde of attendants. Brahmins and sages from all quarters were invited. 
Necessary preparations were made at Naimisharnya. All the items to ensure comfortable 
stay of the invitees were brought from Ayodhya. At several places on way to 
Naimisharnya from Ayodhya, necessary arrangements were made for convenient and 
comfortable stay. 


Page 52 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Army preceded the movement of Bharat who was accompanied by queen mothers, 
wives of the brothers, gold statue of Sita (7-91-25), Brahmins and helper attendants. 
Sugriva and Vibhishan had arrived in time and helped the travel of the people from 
Ayodhya to Naimsharnya. Sugriv took care of serving food to brahmins , and Vibhishan 
attentively served the sages. 

7-92 Valuable gifts in asvamedh (19 / 3290) 

Bharat moved out with all arrangements of ygya at Naimisharny. Subsequently, a black 
horse (looking like krishnsar deer) symbolising the ygya was allowed to move freely over 
earth. It was escorted by Lakshaman. 

Ram arrived at Naimisharnya and was glad to see the preparations. The vassal kings 
offered lots of gifts for the successful completion of ygya. 

The ygya horse came back successfully to Naimisharnya (7-92-9). The ygya continued 
over one year (7-92-19). All sorts of sweet foods made of jiggery, milk and fruits were 
liberally distributed. The precious items were distributed among the people according to 
their choice. The charity continued endlessly and there was no dearth of any item at any 
time. Sages had lots of appreciation for the grandeur of the ygya. 

7-93 Valmiki arrived in ygya (19/ 3309) 

With the commencement of ygya, Valmiki, the illustrious among sages and son of Varun 
(7-93-17) also arrived at Naimisharny with two sons of Sita. He stayed in a cottage 
where all sorts of fruits and roots were kept in abundance. The sage commanded those 
twin brothers to recite the melodious Ramayan accompanied with sweet notes of violin. 
The songful presentation was to be made at all places: streets, cottages of sages and 
Brahmins, camps of queens and kings, ygyashala, and where Ram stayed with his regal 
brothers. 

Valmiki advised them, “At least twenty sarg should be recited every day. If Ram enquires 
about your identity tell him that you are disciples of Valmiki. Take fruits and roots from 
the surrounding forest, and never crave for valuabale gifts of the ygya. Mendicants have 
nothing to do with precious royal gifts.” 

7-94 Ramayan presented by Lav - Kush (32 / 3341) 

It was morning time, and twin brothers after completing their normal ritual, began the 
recital of Ramayan over violin. The notes and rhythms were so captivating that Ram 
invited them for presentation. Large gathering of sages, Brahmins, kings, citizens took 
place and Ram with his brothers attended the sweet concert of Lav and Kush. 

Initially twin brothers made the songful presentation of the condensed first sarg recited 
by Narad. Thereafter they covered twenty more sarg. Due to arrival of noon time, the 
presentation was suspended. Those who attended the concert were of the impression 


Page 53 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


that the twins had face matching with Ram. If they remove matted hair and robe, they 
would exactly resemble Ram. 

Impressed by their expert presentation, Ram asked Bharat to gift each of them eighteen 
thousand gold coins. They didn’t accept the gift and mentioned, “It’s of no use for us in 
the forest.” 

Ram enquired, “Who wrote this epic? How many sarg and shlok are there in the 
complete work?” 

Twins replied, “It has been composed by the sage Valmiki. He is already here to grace 
the ygya. It has twenty four thousand shlok and over hundred stories. It has six kand 
covered in over five hundred sarg. There is uttar kand also which concludes this epic. 
The sage has covered your entire life sketch. If you prefer to listen to its entire content 
allow me time when you are free from ygya." 

7-95 Sita to certify by oath (17 / 3358) 

Ram continued listening to Ramayan presented by Lav and Kush for several days. Along 
with him monkeys, citizens, sages and Brahmins also were benefited by the 
presentation. Through the story of presentation Ram learnt that the two ascetics were 
sons of Sita. 

He sent a messenger to Valmiki, “If Sita prefers it, she should come in the conference of 
citizens and sages and prove by taking oath about her chastity. This is how my blemish 
could be cleared. This could be done in tomorrow’s gathering.” 

When the messenger conveyed the message to Valmiki, he agreed what Ram wanted 
and mentioned, “She will do what he commands. Obeying husband’s command is the 
topmost priority of a married woman.” 

When Ram heard the message of Valmiki, he fixed tomorrow morning for hearing Sita. 
Announcing thus to all sages and citizens, he dispersed the meeting to resume 
tomorrow. 

7-96 Valmiki supported Sita (24 / 3382) 

Next morning large gathering took place around ygyashala. Besides a large assemblage 
of monkys, demons, citizens, brhamins and sages, chief of the sages present were 
Vashishath, Vamdev, Jabali, Kashyap, Vishwamitr, Dirghatama, Durvasa, Pulastya, 
Shakti, Bhargav, Vaman, Markandeya, Modgalya, Garg, Chyavan, Shatanand, Gautam, 
Katyayan, Suygya, and Agastya. 

Valmiki arrived followed by Sita, as if shruti (holy scripture) had followed Brahma. Out of 
shear modesty, Sita came looking over ground. Her eyes were full of tears, and heart 
carried the image of Ram. Her arrival was acclaimed by loud hails of ‘glory to Ram’, 
‘glory to Sita’, ‘glory to Sita and Ram’. 


Page 54 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Entering the assemblage, Valmiki submitted to Ram, “You deserted her fearing public 
criticism. I know how much you love her and how much she loves you. You are sure 
about her chastity but public criticism caused her separation again. When she arrived 
near my ashram, I could see through my meditation about her pure chastity and 
unalloyed affection in you. Thereafter she entered my ashram." 

Valmiki further assured him, “I am tenth son of pracheta {Varum), and have never spoken 
lie and made any false statement. On her behalf, I swear by my earnings of 
auspiciousness gathered through penances, that she is pure and chaste. She is not 
worthy of being blemished. Lav and Kush are your sons.” 

7-97 Sita took oath and entered netherworld (26 / 3408) 

Hearing Valmiki, Ram stood with folded hands, and taking a glance of Sita, looked 
towards the gathering. Addressing Valmiki he spoke, “You are knower of three 
dimensions of time, past, present and future. Sita had proved her chastity in presence of 
gods earlier, and I have absolutely no doubt about her. She arrived with me in Ayodhya 
and stayed together in inner palace. Later, I came to know of simmering denouncement 
in certain section of citizens about her chastity. To clear the public doubt, I discarded her 
again. I know Lav and kush are my sons. I fully trust and endorse the statement of the 
sage Valmiki, but let Sita herself repeat her oath of chastity before the gathering.” 

Soon the sky got occupied by gods Aditya, Vasu, Rudr, Vishwadev, Marudgan, and Nag, 
Garud including other accomplished celestial beings. 

Sita, keeping her gaze down and with folded palms spoke, “If I have faithfully loved with 
my word, mind, and deed, Ram and no other person let the goddess earth give me a 
position in her holy lap.” 

Lo and behold! A beautiful throne carried by naga appeared from earth. Goddess earth 
had herself accompanied the throne. She embraced Sita within her arms, and taking in 
her lap sat over the throne. The throne gradually moved inside the earth. Gods and 
sages showered flowers. Cool and fragrant breeze permeated all around. Some were 
stunned, while others felt overjoyed. Some were found glorifying loudly and joyously, 
while some undertook mediation. Some had fixed their gaze at Ram, and some had 
been looking at Sita only. This was unexpectedly a stunning scene. 

7-98 Brahma consoled Ram (28 / 3436) 

On her departure inside earth, Ram was immersed in deep sorrow. Taking support of a 
gular club, he wept bitterly. Addressing earth he spoke, “As you have given refuge to 
her, give refuge to me also. I know you are my mother-in-law and you will give me 
affection. If you ignore my request, I may lose my temper and entire earth would be 
made desolated or flooded with water." 

While Ram lamented loudly about her, Brahma appeared and consoled him, “Sita is 
goddess Lakshmi. Although you know about yourself, I like to remind you about your 


Page 55 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


supreme divine form. Through earth she had gone to your abode, and when you go back 
there in saketlok, you will find her there.” 

Brahma continued further, “The sage Valmiki has covered all the episodes and events of 
your life very nicely in the epic which you have listened these days. The rest of uttarkand 
is yet to be recited to you. I direct the sage from my lok to do that.” 

Thereafter Brahma disappeared. 

Ram spoke to Valmiki, “As indicated by Brahma, I should be benefited by the 
presentation of the rest portion of Ramayan. This should commence tomorrow morning.” 

Ram left for his cottage taking with him Lav and Kush, and continued reflecting on Sita. 

7-99 Ram’s routine (20/ 3456) 

Next morning Ram listened to the balance part of Ramayan which covered his future. He 
was upset with the departure of Sita, but concluded the ygya successfully. He bade 
farewell to all invitees including sages, Brahmins, monkeys, demons, and citizens with 
liberal gifts of precious items. 

Subsequently coming over to Ayodhya he spent his days with his two sons and family 
members. He continued performing ygya until his stay of ten thousand years. Asvamedh 
was performed umpteen times, accompanied by ten times of Vajpeya ygya. He didn’t 
marry any other woman, and in all ygya installed on his side, Sita made of gold. 

During his reign there was no complain of draught. Grains were found in abundance. 
Nobody suffered affliction and premature death. 

In course of time Kauslya left for abode of her husband. Subsequently, Sumirtr and 
Kaikeyi discarded their mortal remains and joined Dasarth happily in the other world. 
Ram had been punctually offering precious charities in the name of mothers. 

7-100 Bharat moved to gandharv desh (25 /3481) 

Once, Cargya, the preceptor of king Yudhajit of Kaikeyadesh, came to see Ram. He was 
sent by the king Yudhajit, and had carried lots of gifts of ten thousand horses 14 , and 
precious blankets etc. When Ram heard the arrival of sage, he moved forward to extend 
warm reception to the sage. 

When the sage settled in his high seat, Ram enquired about the message of the king. 
The sage conveyed the message of Yudhajit, “On either side of the river Sindhu, there 
lies gandharv desh full of fruit bearing trees and other resources. Over thirty million 
gandharv keep watch over the territory. It is advisable to win this land and settle two 
separate cities.” 


14 Kaikeydesh (part of Afghanistan) is known for high breed horses and woolen garments. 


Page 56 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Ram readily agreed to the proposal, and asked Bharat to move with his princely sons 
Taksh and Pushkal to win the territory of gandharv desh. With this intention, Ram 
crowned both the princes, Taksh and Pushkal as king of two emerging states over there 
in gandharv desh. 

Subsequently Bharat moved with a large army accompanied by princes. On way hordes 
of meat eating deadly demons and animals joined the army. It took one and a half month 
for the forces o\ Ayodhya to reach Kaikeya desh. 

7-101 Bharat secured victory (18/ 3499) 

Yudhajit and Bharat collectively made attack over gandharv desh. Fierce fighting took 
place and for seven days the carnage continued. Streams of blood and hills of corpses 
marked the battle ground. None could appear to secure victory. Lastly, Bharat invoked a 
deadly weapon of Kaldand that was called Samvart. This weapon killed all the thirty 
million gandharva and Bharat emerged victorious. 

Subseuqently, two cities Takshashila and Pushkalavat were settled making Taksh and 
Pushakal incharge of those cities respectively. It took five years for Bharat to settle those 
cities fully and later, he came back to Ram. 

7-102 Crowning of Angad and Chadraketu (17 / 3516) 

When Bharat returned from gandharv desh, and apprised in detail about the operations, 
Ram blessed him for his bravery. Later, one day he addressed his brothers and 
mentioned, “Angad and Chandraketu have the potential to take care of independent 
charge of states. Let us find out suitable places for them.” 

Bharat advised the land of Karupath, and Ram agreed to his proposal. Subsequently, 
Karupath was annexed in the territory of Ayodhya. Ram anointed two princes with crown 
and sent as king of newly carved out states. With Angad went Lakshaman, and helped 
him in settling the city of Angadiya. It took him one year, to make Angad comfortable in 
his control, and thereafter, he came back to Ram. 

Chandraketu was accompanied by Bharat, and he took command of the city of 
Chandrakanta. After staying for one year, when Chandraketu settled in his role of 
administrator, Bharat came back to Ayodhya. 

7-103 Arrival of kal 15 T5Ff (17 / 3533) 

In course of time, kal T5M disguised as an ascetic came to Ayodhya. He requested 
Lakshaman on entry place to inform Ram about arrival of a messenger of sage Atibal. 
When Lakshaman informed Ram, he asked to bring in the ascetic with due respect. Ram 
offered him arghy, padya etc and honoured him over a high seat. When settled, Ram 


15 Refer the next sarg 104, shlok-2 which defines what is kal. It is the time keeper of every being. 


Page 57 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


enquired about his purpose of arrival. The ascetic mentioned, “Before I disclose the 
message, there is a condition that no third person except you and me shall remain here, 
nor hear our conversation, nor would see us talking.” 

Ram readily agreed and asked Lakshaman to be strict in maintaining this condition of 
not allowing anybody’s entry here inside, nor see us talking here, otherwise the 
trespasser would be killed by me. 

7-104 Ram got the message (19 / 3552) 

When Lakshaman ensured the implementation of the condition of talk, Ram invited him 
to begin his conversation and message. Kal spoke, “When the creation was to be 
initiated, during the period of hirnyagarbha, you created me as all pervading delusory 
force TFTT. I became the time keeper for each and every being of the creation including 
yourself.” 

Brahma had sent me here with the message, “while you decided to come over earth for 
end of demons you had fixed eleven thousand years as your stay period. The time is 
now over. Either plan to comeback or you may extend it as you wish." 

Kal narrated what Brahma had mentioned, “Back in the past you withdrew the entire 
creation within yourself, and slept in ocean. Later, in the beginning, first you created me. 
Thereafter you created snake called Anant, having huge hood and body who could stay 
and sleep in water. Subsequently, Madhu and Kaitabh, two demons were created. From 
the huge skeleton of the demons earth was created which got one name as medini itfTTr 
(7-104-6). From your navel had come out a brilliant lotus, and I was created. I was made 
in-charge of expanding the creation. Subsequently I prayed you to uphold each and 
every being by your presence. Answering my prayer, you became Vishnu as eternal 
person and upholder of the entire creation (7-104-9). Subsequently from Aditi you 
appeared as Vaman and encouraged Indr and other gods in righteousness. Later when 
the atrocities of Ravan had culminated to a critical stage, you incarnated in human form. 
The time period fixed by you for stay of eleven thousand years is now over. If you wish 
to come back to your divine abode, you are welcome in your initial form of Vishnu and 
take command of the master of all the gods.” 

Ram welcomed the proposal and spoke to kal , ”1 have decided to come back. In fact I 
had thought about you, and you are here.” 

7-105 Episode of Durvasa (18 / 3570) 

While Ram and kal were together, Durvasa arrived at the palace. Fie asked Lakshaman 
to arrange immediate meeting with Ram. Lakshaman enquired politely, “Ram is busy 
with somebody. What can I do for you?” 

Flearing Lakshaman, Dirvasa looked at him with wide red eyes as if he would burn him 
to ashes, and then burst out loudly, “If you delay my message to Ram, I would curse 
you, Ram, the entire family, and Ayodhya. I can’t contain my anger any longer.” 


Page 58 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


Lakshaman immediately intimated Ram about Durvasa’s arrival. Seeing off kal, Ram 
welcomed Durvasa and offered his respect to him. He enquired the sage, “How can I 
serve you.” 

Durvasa spoke to Ram, “For thousand years I was on fast. I have completed it today and 
I need immediate food.” Ram served him delicious food and getting satisfied to his fill, 
Druvasa left peacefully. 

After departure of Durvasa, Lakshaman was apprehending the capital punishment. Ram 
was also concerned about Lakshaman’s conveying of message while kal was inside. 

7-106 Ram discarded Lakshaman (18 / 3588) 

Ram was in a dilemma of his vow. His face had turned pale. Lakshaman came to him 
and requested him to observe the dharm and punish him with the penalty of death. Ram 
couldn’t speak, and called the meeting of the ministers and sages. On hearing the 
incident, sage Vashishth mentioned, “I had known it earlier. Large scale destruction is 
imminent. I would advise to abandon Lakshaman which is equivalent to capital 
punishment.” 

In the meeting itself Ram announced, “Hence forth I discard Lakshaman.” 

Lakshaman got tears in his eyes, and straightway he came to saryu bank. Performing 
achamaniyam (touching palmful sacred water to mouth) with saryu water, he sat spine 
erect, and held his breath inside. Gods showered flower over him. Soon his body 
disappeared, and he departed to the otherworld where he was given warm welcome by 
Indr and others. Thus one fourth of the potency of Narayan returned to eternal divine 
abode. 

7-107 Lav and Kush crowned (21 / 3609) 

Departure of Lakshaman was a jolt to Ram. He called Bharat and spoke to him, “I would 
crown you the king now, and would depart to forest following the path of Lakshaman.” 
Bhart didn’t agree and he proposed, “Let Lav and Kush be crowned instead. Lav should 
be master of north kosal, and Kush shall be the king of south kosal.” 

In the meanwhile Vashishath drew his attention to the citizens of Ayodhya who were 
lying flat. Ram picked them up and enquired their demand. They mentioned, “Where 
ever you go, we will follow you.” 

Ram agreed, and thereafter, he arranged the coronation of Lav and Kush, and they were 
made king of north and south kosal respectively. A messenger was sent to Shatrughn to 
summon him in Ayodhya. 

7-108 Departing directions (38 / 3647) 

The messenger took three days and three nights in reaching Madhurapuri. On their 
arrival, they narrated all episodes which had taken place in Ayodhya: Lakshaman’s 


Page 59 of 61 



Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


departure, coronation of Lav and Kush, and preparation of Bharat and citizens of 
Ayodhya to depart with Ram. They also informed, “On north of vindhya, a city called 
kushavati had been established for Kush. Similarly for Lav, Shravasti has been 
established.” They advised him move immediately to Ayodhya. 

Shatrughn called his ministers and priest Kanchan and informed them what had 
happened in Ayodhya. He also crowned his son Subahu as king of Madhura, and the 
other son Shatrughati as king of Vidisha. Thus he divided his kingdom in two parts to his 
two sons. 

He moved in a single chariot to Ayodhya. Meeting Ram, he submitted, “I have come fully 
prepared to depart with you. Kindly don’t direct me with any other command. I can’t 
survive your absence anymore.” 

In the meanwhile, the monkeys and bears arrived lead by Sugriv. Having known about 
his planned departure they had arrived in Ayodhya. They also sought his permission to 
depart with him. Sugriv mentioned, “I am free for departure as I have crowned Angad as 
king (7-108-23).” 

Addressing them Ram mentioned, “Hanuman shall be here until end of universe and 
enjoy my legend as desired by him. Vibhishan shall continue in Lanka until end of the 
existence of earth. Vibhishan will also take care of my family deity 16 Lord Ranganath. 
Jambvan, Maind and Dwvid shall stay until advent of kaliyug or dissolution as the case 
may be. The rest of monkeys and bears including Sugriv can accompany me.” 

7-109 Ram moved out of Ayodhya (22 / 3669) 

Early morning Ram made the great departure. He left Ayodhya, and moved towards 
Saryu. As arranged by Vashishath, recitation of mantr observing proper scriptural 
procedures took place. Brahmins lead the horde carrying the sacrificial fire used by Ram 
at his personal square. The umbrella used in Vajpeya ygya was also carried. Ram was 
flanked by sridevi 17 on right with louts in her hands, and bhudevi on left. His destructive 
potential moved in front. Ram carried kush in his hand, and kept reciting scriptural mantr. 
His divine weapons accompanied him in humanly form. Four ved were present in the 
guise of Brahmins. 

Bharat and Shatrughn followed him with the women of the palace. Entire Ayodhya had 
been following him on his footsteps. Monkeys, demons and birds were gladly following 
him. 


3TTWT .FMFJFHITI'-hT/'li'-H-l 7-108-30 

t frt ^stt qrsJ w r i g wt ttt 7-109-06 


Page 60 of 61 


Srimad Valmiki Ramayan condensed 


Uttar kand 


7-110 Divine integration (28 / 3697) 

About one and a half yojan away from Ayodhya, Ram looking to the west took a glance 
of saryu. The moment he entered saryu water Brahma welcome 18 him from sky, “You 
may merge in your four handed Vishnu form 19 or in the infinite space as you deem fit.” 
Bouquets of flowers were showered over him. Fragrant cool breeze pervaded all over. 
Ram with all his brothers merged in Vishnu form 20 . 

Before merging in his divine form he had advised Brahma, “Those who are following me 
here should be provided worthy divine abodes because they have affectionately served 
me.” Brahma assured them santanak lok next to his own abode and near to saket lok. 
Those who were born from the parcel of gods merged in their respective parental body. 
Sugriv merged in the sun, and other monkeys accordingly merged in the respective 
gods. Those who took a dip in saryu water reached their respective abodes as 
proclaimed by Brahma. 

7-111 Glory to the primordial epic (25 / 3722) 

This is the grand end of Valmiki Ramayan. 

Valmiki had predicted, “After departure of Ram, Ayodhya shall be completely deserted 
and desolated. Later in the period of Rishabh, it will regain its dynamism.” 

Uttar kand contains the legend after performance of ygya also. Those who recite it, or 
listen to it are tipped to be favoured by the divinity for their overall wellbeing. If someone 
desires son, he is blessed with that. If someone desires wealth his wish is granted. 
Those who offer fabulous gifts to the person who had recited the Ramayan shall be 
granted his favourite demand. 


18 3TTT35 FFJiji q TO 7-110-08 

19 TifTa#r wtft tt ft fTOFFt 7-110-09 ft -lAH-ii fsttto ftifht. 7-110-10 

20 %T2T[q T-FF TZFTT 7-110-12 


Page 61 of 61 